
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2605.27710

DEEPSCIVERIFY: Verifying Scientific Claim–Citation Alignment via
LLM-Driven Evidence Escalation
Shaghayegh Sadeghi* 
1 
Khashayar Khajavi* 
1 2 
Rise Adhikari 
1 
Alexander Tessier 
1
Abstract
Misalignment between claims and their cited ev-
idence is a common failure mode in reports gen-
erated by large language models, limiting their
reliability in scientific and other high-stakes set-
tings. We present DEEPSCIVERIFY, a two-stage
pipeline for scientific claim–citation verification
that combines abstract-level reasoning with se-
lective escalation to passage-level evidence. The
system first verifies claims using the abstract and
defers uncertain cases, retrieving and analyzing
full-text passages only when necessary. This de-
sign leverages complementary behaviors across
LLMs, as some models are more conservative
while others are more decisive under uncertainty.
On the SCITANCE benchmark, DEEPSCIVERIFY
achieves 86.7 Micro-F1, outperforming strong
abstract-only baselines by +4.5 points while re-
solving 67% of instances without full-text re-
trieval. These results suggest that selective ev-
idence escalation improves both accuracy and ef-
ficiency in claim–citation verification.
1. Introduction
Scientific claim verification (Wadden et al., 2022; Fang et al.,
2025; Alvarez et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025) is the task
of determining whether a scientific claim is supported, con-
tradicted, or not sufficiently resolved by evidence from the
research literature. In generated scientific reports, scientific
claim verification can be framed as claim–citation align-
ment: given a claim and its associated citation, the goal is to
verify whether the cited work actually provides evidence for
the claim. This distinction is important because a citation
may be bibliographically valid while still being semanti-
cally misaligned with the statement it is used to support.
As the volume of scientific publications continues to grow,
and as AI-generated text becomes increasingly common in
* Equal contribution. 
1
FirstPrinciples 
2
School of Computing
Science, Simon Fraser University. Correspondence to: FirstPrinci-
ples <research@firstprinciples.org>.
research workflows (Liang et al., 2024a;b; Khalifa & Al-
badawy, 2024; Kobak et al., 2025), automatic verification of
claim–citation alignment has become an important require-
ment for maintaining the reliability and trustworthiness of
scientific writing.
Existing work in scientific claim verification has largely
been developed around benchmark settings where claims
are verified against abstracts from a fixed scientific corpus.
Systems such as SciFact (Wadden et al., 2022) and SCIVER
(Wang et al., 2025) provide a controlled setting for evaluat-
ing evidence retrieval and veracity prediction, but they sim-
plify several challenges that arise in practical claim–citation
verification. In particular, abstracts provide only a com-
pressed summary of a paper and often omit methodological
details, experimental conditions, quantitative results, ab-
lation findings, or limitations that are necessary to assess
whether a cited work truly supports a claim. As a result, an
abstract may be insufficient even when the cited paper itself
contains relevant evidence.
To address this limitation, in this work, we propose DEEP-
SCIVERIFY, a two-stage claim–citation verification pipeline
(Figure 1). Given a claim and its associated citation, the sys-
tem first parses the citation into structured retrieval signals,
retrieves the cited paper’s abstract through a multi-source
retrieval cascade, and performs abstract-level verification
with an LLM. If the abstract provides sufficient evidence
to support or contradict the claim, the system returns the
verdict through an early-exit mechanism. Otherwise, when
the abstract evidence is insufficient, DEEPSCIVERIFY es-
calates to full-text verification: it retrieves the complete
paper when available, extracts relevant passages using RAG-
based passage retrieval, and produces a final verdict from
passage-level evidence.
We evaluate DEEPSCIVERIFY on SCITANCE(Alvarez et al.,
2024), a scientific claim verification dataset derived from
citation sentences and evidence abstracts. In the three-class
setting, DEEPSCIVERIFY achieves 86.7 Micro-F1 and 81.5
Macro-F1, outperforming the strongest abstract-only base-
line by 4.5 Micro-F1 and improving over the best prior
result on SCITANCE by 6.6 Micro-F1 (Section 6.3). Beyond
overall performance, we analyze how different LLMs be-
have under evidence uncertainty. Our calibration analysis
1
arXiv:2605.27710v1 [cs.AI] 26 May 2026

DEEPSCIVERIFY
Claim + citation
LLM Citation Parser
Normalizes any citation
into structured identifiers
P H A S E 1 — A B S T R A C T - L E V E L
Abstract retrieval cascade
Multi-source
citation retrieval
Abstract comparison
LLM verifier: SUPPORTS | CONTRADICTS | NEI
Definitive
verdict?
Yes
Early exit when
abstract is sufficient
Return verdict
SUPPORTS | CONTRADICTS
No (NEI — escalate)
P H A S E 2 — P A S S A G E - L E V E L
Full-text retrieval cascade
Escalates only
on NEI verdicts
RAG passage extraction
chunk → embed → retrieve top-k
semantic search over full document
Passage retrieval
over full text
Passage comparison
LLM verifier classifies retrieved passages against the claim
Final verdict
SUPPORTS | CONTRADICTS | NEI
ID-based → DOI-based → title-based → fallback
arXiv · Semantic Scholar · CrossRef · OpenAlex · PubMed · web search 
URL → arXiv → open-access sources → fallback
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed two-stage claim verification pipeline. The system first performs abstract-level
verification with an early-exit mechanism and escalates to passage-level retrieval and verification only when abstract
evidence is insufficient.
reveals distinct model-level biases: GPT-5.4 is overly cau-
tious and frequently defaults to NEI, while Claude Sonnet
4.6 is more overconfident and tends to commit to SUPPORTS
or CONTRADICTS even when the available evidence is in-
complete (Section 6.2). Finally, our escalation analysis
shows that DEEPSCIVERIFY resolves 67.0% of instances
at the abstract level and escalates only the remaining 33.0%
to full-text verification, yielding a net gain on it’s correct
predictions(Section D).
Our work makes the following contributions:
• We propose DEEPSCIVERIFY, a two-stage claim–citation
verification pipeline that combines abstract-level early
exit with selective escalation to passage-level evidence.
• We develop multi-source retrieval cascades for citation
parsing, abstract retrieval, and full-text retrieval, enabling
verification under incomplete or noisy citation metadata.
• We analyze model-level calibration in abstract-only ver-
ification and show that different LLMs exhibit distinct
biases under evidence uncertainty, motivating our use of
complementary models across pipeline stages.
• 
We show that selective evidence escalation improves over
strong abstract-only baselines on SCITANCE, and provide
ablations demonstrating the importance of RAG-based
passage extraction 
1
.
2. Related Work
Scientific claim verification is a subarea of fact veri-
fication focused on determining whether scientific evi-
dence supports, contradicts, or is insufficient to verify a
claim. FEVER (Thorne et al., 2018) established the gen-
1
Code and data are available upon request.
eral evidence-based verification formulation, while SciFact
(Wadden et al., 2020; 2022) adapted it to the scientific do-
main by pairing expert-written claims with evidence ab-
stracts. Recent benchmarks further extend this setting: SC-
ITANCE (Alvarez et al., 2024) uses citation sentences as
claims, and SCIVER (Wang et al., 2025) evaluates verifica-
tion in multimodal scientific contexts.
Our work is also related to retrieval-augmented generation
and dense retrieval. RAG (Lewis et al., 2020), dense passage
retrieval (Karpukhin et al., 2020), and sentence embedding
methods (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) show that retrieval
can improve reasoning on knowledge-intensive tasks and
enable scalable search over long documents. These meth-
ods are especially relevant for scientific verification, where
necessary evidence may appear outside the abstract.
Despite these advances, most scientific claim verification
systems remain centered on abstract-level evidence. In prac-
tical claim–citation verification, the cited paper may need
to be resolved from multiple sources, and the relevant evi-
dence may appear only in the full text. DEEPSCIVERIFY
addresses this gap by combining abstract-level verification
with selective escalation to passage-level evidence.
3. Problem Definition
Let c denote a scientific claim and r a cited refer-
ence. The goal is to determine a veracity label y ∈
{SUPPORTS, CONTRADICTS, NEI} 
for the pair (c, r)
based on evidence from the cited work. Here, NEI denotes
not enough information, following the label schema used in
prior work (Wadden et al., 2020; Thorne et al., 2018). This
formulation captures the task of claim–citation alignment,
where the objective is to verify whether the cited reference
provides sufficient evidence to support or contradict the
claim, or whether the available evidence is inconclusive.
2

DEEPSCIVERIFY
4. Methodology
We present DEEPSCIVERIFY, a two-stage pipeline for
claim–citation verification (Figure 1). The system first at-
tempts to verify claims using abstract-level evidence and es-
calates to passage-level analysis only when necessary. Each
stage consists of a retrieval step followed by an evidence
comparison step.
The pipeline operates as a staged decision process. In the
first stage, an abstract-level verifier f
a 
produces a prediction
ˆy
a 
based on abstract evidence e
a
. If ˆy
a
̸
 
= NEI, the system
returns this prediction. Otherwise, the system retrieves
passage-level evidence e
p 
= {p
1
, . . . , p
k
} from the full text
and applies a second verifier f
p 
to produce the final label:
ˆy =
(
f
a
(c, e
a
), if f
a
(c, e
a
)̸ = NEI,
f
p
(c, e
p
), otherwise. 
(1)
4.1. Phase 1: Abstract-Level Verification
Phase 1 verifies the claim using only the abstract of the
cited paper, resolving a substantial proportion of instances
without full-text access (Wadden et al., 2020; Wadden & Lo,
2021).
4.1.1. ABSTRACT RETRIEVAL
The abstract retrieval stage operates as a cascade guided by
signals extracted from the citation, as shown in Figure 2(a).
Given a claim–citation pair (c, r), the goal is to retrieve an
abstract e
a 
corresponding to the cited reference r.
Citation Parsing. The process begins with an LLM-based
citation parser, which converts the raw citation string into
structured fields, including arXiv ID, DOI, URL, and title.
These fields serve as retrieval signals that determine which
branches of the cascade can be activated. By standardizing
heterogeneous citation formats into a consistent representa-
tion, the parser enables reliable downstream retrieval.
Identifier-based Retrieval. When an arXiv identifier is
available, the system performs direct lookup using the arXiv
API, followed by resolution through Semantic Scholar (Kin-
ney et al., 2023). This stage provides the most precise
retrieval signal, as identifiers uniquely specify a document.
DOI-based Retrieval. If a DOI is present, the sys-
tem queries multiple scholarly APIs, including Semantic
Scholar (Kinney et al., 2023) and OpenAlex (Priem et al.,
2022). DOI-based lookup offers high coverage and reliabil-
ity across publishers and disciplines.
Title-based Retrieval. In the absence of reliable identi-
fiers, the system falls back to title-based search across mul-
Input citation r
LLM Citation Parser
Extracts: arXiv ID DOI URL title
Identifier-based Retrieval
• arXiv API
• Semantic Scholar (by arXiv ID)
Abstract Retrieval (R
a
)
DOI-based Retrieval
• Semantic Scholar (by DOI)
• OpenAlex (by DOI)
Title-based Retrieval
• Semantic Scholar
• CrossRef
• OpenAlex
• PubMed
Fallback Retrieval
• Direct URL retrieval
• LLM web search
Accept if:
• abstract is non-empty
• sufficient title similarity
(τ = 0.30)
Direct Retrieval
• URL (HTML / PDF)
Full-text Retrieval (R
p
)
arXiv Retrieval
• HTML
• PDF
Open-access Retrieval
• Semantic Scholar OA PDF
• PubMed Central XML
Fallback Retrieval
• LLM web search
Accept if:
• valid content is retrieved
• passes quality checks
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: Overview of the two-stage retrieval architecture in.
An input citation r is first processed by an LLM-based parser
to extract structured signals (e.g., arXiv ID, DOI, URL, and
title), which guide both retrieval cascades. (a) Abstract-
level retrieval (R
a
) operates as a hierarchical cascade from
identifier-based lookup to fallback strategies. (b) Full-text
retrieval (R
p
) retrieves and processes complete documents
when abstract-level evidence is insufficient. Each cascade
halts at the first stage that satisfies its acceptance criterion,
and the retrieved evidence is forwarded to the corresponding
verification module.
tiple sources, including Semantic Scholar, CrossRef (Hen-
dricks et al., 2020), OpenAlex, and PubMed (Sayers et al.,
2022). This stage trades precision for recall, allowing recov-
ery of references with incomplete or noisy metadata.
Fallback Retrieval. If all structured retrieval attempts fail,
the system applies fallback strategies, including direct URL-
based retrieval and LLM-assisted web search. This stage is
designed to maximize coverage in cases where bibliographic
metadata is missing or corrupted. Prompts for LLM-assisted
abstract search are provided in Appendix A.3.
Acceptance Criterion. At each stage, retrieved candi-
dates are validated using a lightweight acceptance gate.
An abstract is accepted if it is non-empty and sufficiently
matches the citation, measured via title similarity. The
cascade terminates at the first stage that produces a valid
result, ensuring both efficiency and robustness. Additional
implementation details, including acceptance criteria, are
provided in Appendix B.
3

DEEPSCIVERIFY
4.1.2. ABSTRACT COMPARISON AND EARLY EXIT
Once the abstract e
a 
is retrieved, the system performs claim–
evidence classification using a large language model. The
model receives the claim c and the abstract e
a 
as input and
predicts a label:
ˆy
a 
= f
a
(c, e
a
), ˆy
a 
∈ {SUPPORTS, CONTRADICTS, NEI}.
(2)
The model is prompted to assess whether the abstract pro-
vides sufficient evidence to support or contradict the claim,
or whether the available evidence is inconclusive. Full
prompts are provided in Appendix A.
The predicted label ˆy
a 
also serves as a decision signal for
the pipeline. If ˆy
a 
∈ {SUPPORTS, CONTRADICTS}, the
system returns this prediction directly, avoiding unnecessary
full-text retrieval. Otherwise, if ˆy
a 
= NEI, the pipeline
escalates to the full-text retrieval stage. This design allocates
computational resources according to instance difficulty
(Wadden et al., 2022).
4.2. Phase 2: Passage-Level Verification
Phase 2 is triggered when ˆy
a 
= NEI. In this case, abstract-
level evidence is insufficient, and the system performs
deeper verification using full-text content.
4.2.1. FULL-TEXT RETRIEVAL
The full-text retrieval stage follows a structured cascade
similar to the abstract retrieval process, as illustrated in
Figure 2(b). Given a cited reference r, the goal is to retrieve
the full document from which fine-grained evidence can be
extracted.
Direct Retrieval. The system first attempts to retrieve
content directly from the URL associated with the citation,
when available. This includes both HTML pages and PDF
documents, which are parsed into raw text.
arXiv Retrieval. If an arXiv identifier is available, the
system retrieves the document from arXiv. When possible,
the HTML version is preferred due to its cleaner structure,
with PDF used as a fallback.
Open-access Retrieval. Next, the system queries open-
access repositories, including Semantic Scholar (Kinney
et al., 2023) and PubMed Central (PMC) (Sayers et al.,
2022), to obtain full-text documents in PDF or structured
XML formats.
Fallback Retrieval. If all previous stages fail, the system
performs LLM-assisted web search using the cited paper
title. The search prompt asks the model to return a freely
accessible direct full-text URL in PDF, XML, or HTML
format, prioritizing open repositories such as PMC, arXiv,
preprint servers, and institutional repositories. To reduce
hallucinated retrievals, the model is instructed to return
found: false rather than guess or invent a URL when
no direct full-text link is found. Prompts for LLM-assisted
full-text search are provided in Appendix A.4.
Acceptance Criterion. Retrieved documents are validated
using a lightweight acceptance criterion. A document is
accepted if it contains sufficient textual content and passes
basic quality checks (e.g., excluding corrections or errata).
As in Phase 1, the cascade terminates at the first stage that
produces a valid result. Additional implementation details,
including filtering criteria, are provided in Appendix B.
4.2.2. PASSAGE EXTRACTION
Once the full text is retrieved, the system extracts a set
of relevant passages e
p 
= {p
1
, p
2
, . . . , p
k
} that are most
likely to contain evidence for the claim c. Our approach
follows the retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) paradigm
(Lewis et al., 2020). The full text is segmented into chunks,
each of which is mapped to a dense vector representation
using a sentence embedding model (Reimers & Gurevych,
2019). The claim is embedded in the same space, and the
top-k most relevant passages are selected based on cosine
similarity:
e
p 
= top-k
 
v
c 
· v
p
i
∥v
c
∥ ∥v
p
i 
∥

, (3)
where v
c 
denotes the embedding of the claim and v
p
i 
de-
notes the embedding of the i-th passage. This approach
scales efficiently to long documents and enables focused
retrieval of evidence without requiring the entire document
to be processed by the LLM.
Furthermore, we also consider an LLM-based extraction
strategy in which the full text and claim are provided di-
rectly to a model, which selects relevant passages based
on semantic reasoning. This approach is evaluated as an
ablation (Section 6.4) to compare against the RAG-based
method.
4.2.3. PASSAGE COMPARISON
The extracted passages e
p 
are then compared against the
claim c using an LLM-based classifier:
ˆy
p 
= f
p
(c, e
p
), ˆy
p 
∈ {SUPPORTS, CONTRADICTS, NEI}.
(4)
The classifier evaluates the passages collectively and deter-
mines whether they provide sufficient evidence to support or
contradict the claim. If the evidence remains inconclusive,
the system outputs NEI.
4

DEEPSCIVERIFY
4.3. Final Verdict
The overall verdict ˆy follows Equation 1: the system returns
the Phase 1 prediction if definitive, or the Phase 2 prediction
otherwise. When evidence remains inconclusive after both
phases, the system outputs NEI, prioritizing precision over
unsupported conclusions.
5. Experiments
5.1. Dataset
We evaluate on SCITANCE (Alvarez et al., 2024), a scientific
claim verification dataset derived from SCIFACT (Wadden
et al., 2020). Unlike SCIFACT, which uses expert-written
claims, SCITANCE uses citation sentences (citances) as
claims, making it closely aligned with claim–citation verifi-
cation. Each citance is paired with an evidence abstract and
labeled as SUPPORTS, CONTRADICTS, or NEI. Contra-
diction examples were generated by negating citances with
GPT-3.5 (Alvarez et al., 2024). The dataset contains 656 in-
stances in total: 251 SUPPORTS, 225 CONTRADICTS, and
180 NEI, split into 467 train, 98 dev, and 91 test instances.
Following our experimental design, we use the combined
train and development splits to analyze model behavior and
calibration, and reserve the test split exclusively for final
evaluation and comparison against baselines.
5.2. Experimental Setting
We evaluate both two-class and three-class settings. In
the two-class setting, the model predicts only SUPPORTS
or CONTRADICTS, whereas in the three-class setting it
additionally predicts NEI. We report Micro-F1 and Macro-
F1 in both settings, and in the three-class setting, we also
report the binary support versus not-support metric used in
prior work. We compare DEEPSCIVERIFY against several
strong LLM baselines, including GPT-4, GPT-5.4, Gemini
2.5 Flash, and Claude Sonnet 4.6. In this work, All LLM-
driven components are accessed via hosted provider APIs.
All baseline models are evaluated in a zero-shot setting, with
temperature set to 0.
For DEEPSCIVERIFY, we use the two-stage pipeline de-
scribed in Section 4, consisting of abstract-level verification
followed by optional full-text retrieval and passage-level
verification when the abstract is insufficient. The specific
design choices of the pipeline, including the selection of
LLMs and retrieval configurations, are informed by the
model behavior and calibration analysis presented in Sec-
tion 6.2. Final performance is reported on the held-out
test set (Section 6.3), and ablation studies examining key
components of the system are provided in Section 6.4.
Table 1: Coverage of abstract and full-text retrieval over 412
unique papers in SCITANCE.
Retrieval Type Count Percentage
Abstract retrieved 391 94.9%
Full text retrieved 333 80.8%
Abstract only 74 18.0%
No retrieval 5 1.2%
Implementation details. For passage-level retrieval, the
full text is segmented into chunks of 5,000 tokens. We
retrieve the top-2 passages based on cosine similarity
with a threshold of 0.5. The embedding model used
is text-embedding-3-small (OpenAI, 2024). The
choice of models and retrieval parameters is guided by the
analysis in Section 6.2. All prompts are provided in Ap-
pendix A, and full model and experiment configuration
details are reported in Appendix C.
6. Results
6.1. Retrieval Coverage Analysis
To evaluate the effectiveness of our retrieval modules (Sec-
tions 4.1.1 and 4.2.1), we analyze their coverage over all
unique cited papers in SCITANCE. We extract 412 unique
references across the train, development, and test splits, and
attempt to retrieve both abstracts and full text for each paper.
Table 1 summarizes the results. Abstract retrieval achieves
high coverage, successfully retrieving abstracts for 391 pa-
pers (94.9%). Full-text retrieval is more challenging but still
recovers complete documents for 333 papers (80.8%). In
74 cases (18.0%), the abstract is available but full text is
not retrieved, while only 5 papers (1.2%) have no retrieved
evidence.
These results highlight two important aspects of the task.
First, while abstracts are widely available, full-text access
is not guaranteed, reinforcing the need for a system that
can operate effectively under partial evidence. Second, the
retrieval pipeline provides full-text access for the major-
ity of cited papers, enabling passage-level verification in
many cases where abstract evidence may be insufficient.
Additional source-level, split-level, and latency analyses are
provided in Appendix E.
6.2. Calibration Analysis
We first analyze how different LLMs behave in the abstract-
level verification setting on the combined train+dev split
(n = 565). In these experiments, each model is given the
claim together with the corresponding evidence abstract and
asked to predict one of SUPPORTS, CONTRADICTS, or
NEI. Our goal is to determine whether the models exhibit
5

DEEPSCIVERIFY
similar behavior or whether they have distinct implicit biases
under the same evidence conditions. Figure 3 provides
a detailed view of error distributions across labels, while
Figure 4 summarizes per-class recall in a compact form.
Together, these visualizations show that the models differ
substantially not only in overall performance, but also in
how they allocate predictions across the three labels.
Surprisingly, GPT-4 emerges as the most well-calibrated
abstract-level verifier, exhibiting consistently strong and bal-
anced recall across all three classes (81% SUPPORTS, 86%
CONTRADICTS, 74% NEI; Figure 3). Table 2 summarizes
these patterns qualitatively and connects each model’s error
profile to its role in our pipeline design. This balanced be-
havior is also reflected in Figure 4, where GPT-4 exhibits the
most uniform recall profile across all three classes. In con-
trast, GPT-5.4 which is a newer model, exhibits a markedly
conservative bias: while it achieves the highest NEI recall
(81%), it does so at the expense of SUPPORTS recall (62%),
misclassifying 33% of true SUPPORTS instances as NEI.
This asymmetry suggests that GPT-5.4 systematically defers
judgment when abstract evidence is even mildly incomplete.
While detrimental in a single-stage setting, this behavior is
desirable in a staged pipeline, where NEI serves as a trigger
for escalation rather than a terminal prediction.
Claude Sonnet 4.6 displays the opposite calibration profile.
It is highly decisive, achieving strong recall on SUPPORTS
(81%) and the highest recall on CONTRADICTS (90%), but
at the cost of substantially weaker NEI detection (56%).
As shown in Figure 3, 34% of true NEI instances are mis-
classified as SUPPORTS, indicating a strong tendency to
overcommit under uncertainty. This asymmetry is visually
apparent in Figure 4, where Claude’s performance is skewed
toward decisive labels at the expense of NEI. Gemini 2.5
Flash exhibits a similar but less extreme pattern, combining
moderate CONTRADICTS recall (83%) with elevated con-
fusion between SUPPORTS and NEI (29% of SUPPORTS
mapped to NEI). Taken together, these results reveal that
LLMs do not simply differ in overall accuracy, but exhibit
distinct and systematic calibration biases along the caution–
overconfidence spectrum. This variation is central to our
design: rather than selecting a single “best” model, DEEP-
SCIVERIFY leverages these complementary behaviors by
assigning conservative models to early-stage filtering and
more balanced models to final decision-making.
These calibration differences motivate our pipeline design.
We use GPT-5.4 as the abstract-level verifier because its
conservative behavior makes it suitable for deciding when to
escalate beyond the abstract. For passage-level verification,
where the system has access to more focused evidence, we
use GPT-4 because of its more balanced behavior across all
three labels. This combination allows DEEPSCIVERIFY to
avoid overcommitting at the abstract stage while still making
calibrated final decisions once passage-level evidence is
available.
6.3. Main Results
Table 3 presents the main results on the SCITANCE test set.
Since SCITANCE already provides evidence abstracts, all
abstract-only baselines use the provided abstract as input.
In the full-text setting, we additionally equip the model with
the full-text retriever described in Section 4.2.1, allowing it
to retrieve and use passage-level evidence when the abstract-
level prediction is NEI.
In the two-class setting without NEI, all models perform
strongly, with Claude Sonnet 4.6 achieving the highest per-
formance (93.2 Micro-F1). This suggests that modern LLMs
are effective when forced to decide only between support
and contradiction. However, this setting removes the need
to detect insufficient evidence, which is central to realistic
scientific verification.
In the full three-class setting, performance drops across all
abstract-only baselines, showing that correctly identifying
NEI remains challenging. Providing access to full-text ev-
idence improves most models, indicating that information
beyond the abstract can be useful. However, the gains from
naive full-text usage are limited: GPT-4 decreases from 82.2
to 81.3 Micro-F1, while Claude Sonnet 4.6 improves only
marginally from 81.1 to 82.4.
DEEPSCIVERIFY achieves the best overall performance,
reaching 86.7 Micro-F1 and 81.5 Macro-F1. This outper-
forms the strongest abstract-only baseline by +4.5 Micro-F1
and improves over the best number reported by Alvarez
et al. (2024) on SCITANCE by +6.6 Micro-F1. Since SCI-
TANCE uses a 91-instance test split, these gains should be
interpreted with appropriate caution, but they are consistent
across Micro-F1, Macro-F1, and Sup./Not Sup. Overall,
the results suggest that full-text evidence is most effective
when used selectively: DEEPSCIVERIFY resolves confident
cases at the abstract level and escalates uncertain cases to
passage-level verification, avoiding both premature deci-
sions and unnecessary noise from full-text processing. We
provide a detailed breakdown of this escalation behavior in
Appendix D.
6.4. Ablation Analysis
Table 4 isolates the contribution of the passage extraction
component in Phase 2. Starting from the abstract-only GPT-
4 baseline (82.2 Micro-F1), adding passage-level verifica-
tion consistently improves performance, confirming that full-
text evidence provides additional signal beyond abstracts
alone.
However, the choice of extraction strategy is critical. In
the LLM-based extractor, the paper is first truncated and
6

DEEPSCIVERIFY
supports contradicts NEI
supports
contradicts
NEI
81% 4% 15%
8% 86% 6%
24% 2% 74%
GPT-4
supports contradicts NEI
supports
contradicts
NEI
62% 6% 33%
5% 84% 11%
16% 3% 81%
GPT-5.4
supports contradicts NEI
supports
contradicts
NEI
81% 9% 9%
6% 90% 3%
34% 9% 56%
Claude
supports contradicts NEI
supports
contradicts
NEI
65% 6% 29%
8% 83% 9%
33% 6% 61%
Gemini
0%
10%
20%
30%
50%
70%
100%
Row-normalised rate
Figure 3: Row-normalized confusion matrices for abstract-only verification on the SCITANCE train+dev set. Each model is
given the claim and evidence abstract and predicts SUPPORTS, CONTRADICTS, or NEI. Rows indicate gold labels and
columns indicate predicted labels. The matrices reveal distinct calibration patterns across models, including conservative
behavior, overcommitment, and class-specific error asymmetries. We compute these matrices on the combined train+dev
split (n = 565) to obtain more stable calibration estimates; see Section 6.2.
Table 2: Qualitative calibration analysis of abstract-only LLM verification on the SCITANCE train+dev set (n = 565). The
analysis is based on the row-normalized confusion matrices in Figure 3.
Model Observed Calibration Pattern
GPT-4 Balanced. Shows the most even behavior across classes, with recall of 81% for SUPPORTS, 86%
for CONTRADICTS, and 74% for NEI. This makes it the most stable verifier across the three-way
decision.
GPT-5.4 
Conservative. Achieves strong NEI recall (81%) but lower SUPPORTS recall (62%), with 33% of
true SUPPORTS cases predicted as NEI. This makes it well suited for an early-stage verifier that
should escalate uncertain cases rather than overcommit.
Gemini 2.5 Flash Cautious with moderate imbalance. Like GPT-5.4, it often maps true SUPPORTS cases to NEI
(29%), while achieving 83% recall on CONTRADICTS and 61% on NEI.
Claude Sonnet 4.6 Overconfident. Performs strongly on decisive labels, with 81% SUPPORTS recall and 90%
CONTRADICTS recall, but has weaker NEI recall (56%). It frequently converts true NEI cases
into SUPPORTS or CONTRADICTS, indicating a tendency to overcommit when abstract evidence is
incomplete.
Figure 4: Per-class recall comparison across models on
the SCITANCE train+dev set, highlighting differences in
calibration behavior.
converted into line-numbered text; the model then receives
the claim and numbered paper and returns ranked, non-
overlapping line ranges rather than generating passage text
directly. This constrains the extractor to select spans from
the source document and reduces hallucinated passage con-
tent. Using an LLM-based extractor yields modest gains
(+1.1 Micro-F1, +2.0 Macro-F1), but reduces the Sup./Not
Sup. metric from 86.7 to 83.3. This indicates a shift to-
ward over-prediction of SUPPORTS, where some instances
that should remain NEI are instead assigned a positive ver-
dict. In other words, the LLM extractor improves recall
by surfacing more candidate evidence, but at the cost of
precision, likely because it may select passages that appear
semantically relevant yet do not constitute strong supporting
evidence.
In contrast, the RAG-based extractor (which we explained in
Section 4.2.2) improves all metrics simultaneously, achiev-
ing the best overall performance (+4.5 Micro-F1). By
grounding passage selection in embedding-based similar-
ity, the RAG pipeline retrieves more focused and evidence-
aligned text segments, reducing spurious matches and limit-
ing false positive support predictions. This leads to better
7

DEEPSCIVERIFY
Table 3: Results on the SCITANCE test set. ∆ shows absolute improvement over the best abstract-only baseline in each
setting. Best results per setting are bolded.
Setting Evidence Model Micro-F1 Macro-F1 Sup./Not Sup. ∆ Micro
Without NEI
(2-class) 
Abstract
GPT-4 91.9 91.9 — —
GPT-5.4 87.8 87.8 — —
Gemini 2.5 Flash 86.5 86.4 — —
Claude Sonnet 4.6 93.2 93.2 — —
With NEI
(3-class)
Abstract
GPT-4 82.2 78.8 86.7 ref.
GPT-5.4 74.4 72.4 81.1 –7.8
Gemini 2.5 Flash 74.4 70.8 75.6 –7.8
Claude Sonnet 4.6 81.1 73.8 85.6 –1.1
Full-text
GPT-4 81.3 76.7 84.6 –0.9
GPT-5.4 79.1 76.1 81.3 –3.1
Gemini 2.5 Flash 75.8 71.0 78.0 –6.4
Claude Sonnet 4.6 82.4 76.2 85.7 +0.2
DEEPSCIVERIFY (Ours) 86.7 81.5 88.9 +4.5
Table 4: Ablation of DEEPSCIVERIFY pipeline compo-
nents on the SCITANCE test set (3-class, With NEI). All
configurations use GPT-5.4 for abstract-level verification;
the extraction method varies in Phase 2, with GPT-4 as the
passage-level verifier. ∆ shows Micro-F1 change relative to
the abstract-only baseline. Best results bolded.
Configuration Mi-F1 Ma-F1 S/NS ∆
GPT-4 abstract only 82.2 78.8 86.7 ref.
+ GPT-5.4 LLM extractor 83.3 80.8 83.3 +1.1
+ GPT-5.4 RAG extractor 86.7 81.5 88.9 +4.5
balance across all three classes, particularly in preserving
correct NEI decisions while still enabling corrections when
sufficient evidence exists.
Overall, these results highlight that the benefit of Phase 2
does not come merely from accessing full text, but from
how relevant evidence is identified. Structured retrieval
via RAG provides a more reliable signal for downstream
verification than direct LLM-based extraction, which can
blur the boundary between relevance and evidential support.
7. Discussion
Our results highlight a limitation of single-step verification
with large language models. When asked to decide from
abstract-level evidence alone, models must both interpret the
claim and assess whether the available evidence is sufficient.
As shown in Section 6.2, this leads to consistent but different
behaviors across models: some tend to be conservative
and default to NEI, while others are more decisive and
risk overcommitting under incomplete evidence. These
differences suggest that model outputs are influenced not
only by reasoning ability, but also by implicit calibration
tendencies.
We also find that performance depends on how evidence is
provided. Abstracts are widely available but often lack the
detail needed to verify citation-level claims, while naively
providing full-text documents leads to only modest improve-
ments (Section 6.3). This suggests that the challenge is not
only retrieving more information, but selecting the parts of
the document most informative for the claim.
Our approach combines these observations. By using a
staged design, the system defers uncertain cases at the ab-
stract level and then performs focused verification with
passage-level evidence. At the same time, we leverage
differences in model behavior by assigning models to roles
that better match their tendencies. While our experiments
are limited to SCITANCE, the results suggest that combin-
ing complementary model behaviors with selective evidence
escalation can improve reliability in scientific verification
tasks.
8. Conclusion
We introduced DEEPSCIVERIFY, a two-stage pipeline for
scientific claim–citation verification that uses abstract-level
evidence first and selectively escalates to passage-level evi-
dence when the abstract is insufficient. Our analysis shows
that LLMs exhibit different calibration behaviors under un-
certainty, and DEEPSCIVERIFY leverages these complemen-
tary tendencies through a staged design. On SCITANCE, the
system outperforms strong abstract-only baselines by +4.5
Micro-F1 in the three-class setting. While our evaluation is
limited by the small test set and single-domain benchmark,
the results suggest that selective evidence escalation is a
promising direction for improving scientific claim–citation
alignment when relevant evidence is absent from abstracts
but available in the full text.
8

DEEPSCIVERIFY
References
Alvarez, C., Bennett, M., and Wang, L. L. Zero-shot scien-
tific claim verification using LLMs and citation text. In
Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Scholarly Docu-
ment Processing (SDP 2024), pp. 269–276, 2024.
Fang, L., Fu, D., and Torvik, V. I. Automatic scientific
claims verification with pruned evidence graph. In To-
wards Agentic AI for Science: Hypothesis Generation,
Comprehension, Quantification, and Validation, 2025.
Hendricks, G., Tkaczyk, D., Lin, J., and Feeney, P. Crossref:
The Sustainable Source of Community-Owned Scholarly
Metadata. Quantitative Science Studies, 1(1):414–427,
2020. doi: 10.1162/qss\ a\ 00022.
Karpukhin, V., Oguz, B., Min, S., Lewis, P., Wu, L., Edunov,
S., Chen, D., and Yih, W.-t. Dense Passage Retrieval for
Open-Domain Question Answering. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 6769–6781. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, 2020.
Khalifa, M. and Albadawy, M. Using artificial intelligence
in academic writing and research: An essential productiv-
ity tool. Computer methods and programs in biomedicine
update, 5:100145, 2024.
Kinney, R., Anastasiades, C., Authur, R., Beltagy, I., Bragg,
J., Buraczynski, A., Cachola, I., Candra, S., Chan-
drasekhar, Y., Cohan, A., et al. The Semantic Scholar
Open Data Platform. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10140,
2023.
Kobak, D., Gonz 
´
alez-M 
´
arquez, R., Horv 
´
at, E.- 
´
A., and
Lause, J. Delving into LLM-assisted writing in biomed-
ical publications through excess vocabulary. Science
Advances, 11(27):eadt3813, 2025.
Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V.,
Goyal, N., K 
¨
uttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W.-t., Rockt 
¨
aschel,
T., et al. Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-
Intensive NLP Tasks. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, pp. 9459–
9474, 2020.
Liang, W., Izzo, Z., Zhang, Y., Lepp, H., Cao, H., Zhao, X.,
Chen, L., Ye, H., Liu, S., Huang, Z., et al. Monitoring
ai-modified content at scale: A case study on the impact
of chatgpt on ai conference peer reviews. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.07183, 2024a.
Liang, W., Zhang, Y., Wu, Z., Lepp, H., Ji, W., Zhao, X.,
Cao, H., Liu, S., He, S., Huang, Z., et al. Mapping
the increasing use of LLMs in scientific papers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.01268, 2024b.
OpenAI. New embedding models and api up-
dates. https://openai.com/index/
new-embedding-models-and-api-updates/
,
2024. Accessed: 2026-04-27.
Priem, J., Piwowar, H., and Orr, R. OpenAlex: A fully-open
index of scholarly works, authors, venues, institutions,
and concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01833, 2022.
Reimers, N. and Gurevych, I. Sentence-BERT: Sentence
Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks. Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 3982–3992,
2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1410.
Sayers, E. W., Bolton, E. E., Brister, J. R., Canese, K., Chan,
J., Comeau, D. C., Connor, R., Funk, K., Kelly, C., Kim,
S., et al. Database Resources of the National Center for
Biotechnology Information. Nucleic Acids Research, 50
(D1):D98–D106, 2022. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1112.
Thorne, J., Vlachos, A., Christodoulopoulos, C., and Mittal,
A. FEVER: a Large-scale Dataset for Fact Extraction and
VERification. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pp. 809–819. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2018.
Wadden, D. and Lo, K. Overview and Insights from the
SCIVER Shared Task on Scientific Claim Verification. In
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Scholarly Docu-
ment Processing, pp. 124–129. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2021.
Wadden, D., Lin, S., Lo, K., Wang, L. L., van Zuylen, M.,
Cohan, A., and Hajishirzi, H. Fact or Fiction: Verifying
Scientific Claims. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pp. 7534–7550. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.
609.
Wadden, D., Lo, K., Kuehl, B., Cohan, A., Beltagy, I., Wang,
L. L., and Hajishirzi, H. SciFact-Open: Towards Open-
Domain Scientific Claim Verification. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2022, pp. 4719–4734. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2022.
Wang, C., Shen, Y., Kuang, Z., Cohan, A., and Zhao, Y.
SciVer: Evaluating Foundation Models for Multimodal
Scientific Claim Verification. In Proceedings of the 63rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8562–8579,
2025.
9

DEEPSCIVERIFY
A. Prompts Configuration
All LLM-based components are prompted to return struc-
tured JSON outputs, enabling deterministic parsing and in-
tegration into the retrieval and verification pipeline. Unless
otherwise stated, all model calls use temperature 0. This
appendix reports the prompts used for the main comparison
modules and the LLM-assisted retrieval fallbacks.
A.1. Abstract-Level Verification Prompt
The abstract-level verifier is used in Phase 1. Given a
claim and the cited paper’s abstract, the model predicts
whether the abstract SUPPORTS, CONTRADICTS, or pro-
vides NOT ENOUGH INFO for the claim.
System prompt.
With a specific abstract, please make an estimation
whether the abstract SUPPORTS or CONTRADICTS
the claim, or if there is NOT_ENOUGH_INFO to
determine.
You must choose SUPPORTS or CONTRADICTS or
NOT_ENOUGH_INFO.
Please return your answer as a valid JSON object
with the verdict as one of the capitalized
tokens (SUPPORTS, CONTRADICTS, NOT_ENOUGH_INFO),
as well as an explanation or rationale for the
answer.
Respond with ONLY a valid JSON object no markdown
fences, no extra text:
{
"verdict": "<SUPPORTS | CONTRADICTS |
NOT_ENOUGH_INFO>",
"reasoning": "<explanation or rationale for the
answer>"
}
User prompt.
Abstract: {abstract}
Claim: {claim}
A.2. Passage-Level Verification Prompt
The passage-level verifier is used in Phase 2 after the
pipeline escalates beyond the abstract. The passage is
treated as the primary evidence, while the abstract provides
supplementary context when available.
System prompt.
With a specific passage from a paper and the paper’s
abstract, please make an estimation whether
the evidence SUPPORTS or CONTRADICTS the claim,
or if there is NOT_ENOUGH_INFO to determine.
The PASSAGE is the primary evidence. The ABSTRACT
provides supplementary context but should not
override what the passage says.
You must choose SUPPORTS or CONTRADICTS or
NOT_ENOUGH_INFO.
Please return your answer as a valid JSON object
with the verdict as one of the capitalized
tokens (SUPPORTS, CONTRADICTS, NOT_ENOUGH_INFO),
as well as an explanation or rationale for the
answer.
Respond with ONLY a valid JSON object no markdown
fences, no extra text:
{
"verdict": "<SUPPORTS | CONTRADICTS |
NOT_ENOUGH_INFO>",
"reasoning": "<explanation or rationale for the
answer>"
}
User prompt.
Abstract: {abstract}
Passage: {passage}
Claim: {claim}
When no abstract is available, we use the same verdict
schema but omit the abstract field and the instruction that
describes the abstract as supplementary context.
A.3. LLM-Assisted Abstract Search Prompt
The abstract retrieval cascade uses LLM-assisted web search
only as a final fallback when structured retrieval sources
fail. The prompt emphasizes that the model must return
only abstracts found from real web results and should prefer
a negative result over fabricating a match.
System prompt.
You are an academic citation lookup assistant with
web search access.
You will receive a CITATION from a scientific
research report. Your task is to search the web,
find the cited paper, and return its abstract.
Instructions:
1. Use web search to look for the citation try the
title, authors, year, and any URL or identifier
provided.
2. Look broadly: the match could be a journal paper,
arXiv preprint, conference paper, thesis,
technical report, or any other published work.
3. The citation’s title may be paraphrased,
corrupted, or slightly different from the real
title try searching for key phrases and author
names, not just the exact title.
4. When you find the paper, extract its full
abstract text.
CRITICAL RULES read carefully:
- ONLY return information from papers you actually
found on the web with a real, working URL that
you visited or that appeared in your search
results.
- NEVER copy the citation’s own text and present it
as a "found" result. Every field must come from
an independent source you discovered through
search.
- If your web search returns NO pages containing
this publication, you MUST return {"found":
false, ...}. A negative result is correct and
expected when a citation cannot be located.
- Do NOT guess, infer, or reconstruct a plausible-
sounding abstract. If you are not confident the
result is the correct paper, do not include it.
- It is MUCH better to return a negative result than
to fabricate a match.
10

DEEPSCIVERIFY
Respond with ONLY a valid JSON object no markdown
fences, no extra text:
{
"found": true,
"title": "<exact title as found on the web>",
"abstract": "<full abstract text>",
"authors": "<comma-separated author names>",
"year": "<publication year>",
"source_url": "<URL where you found the paper>"
}
If you cannot find the paper, respond with:
{
"found": false,
"title": "",
"abstract": "",
"authors": "",
"year": "",
"source_url": ""
}
User prompt.
Find the scientific paper described by the citation
below and return its abstract.
Citation: {citation}
A.4. LLM-Assisted Full-Text Search Prompt
The full-text retrieval cascade uses LLM-assisted web
search as a final fallback when direct URL, arXiv, Semantic
Scholar open-access PDF, and PubMed Central retrieval
fail. The model is asked to return a direct, freely accessible
full-text URL rather than a landing page.
System prompt.
You are an academic paper URL finder with web search
access.
You will receive the TITLE of a scientific paper.
Your task is to search the web and find a
direct link to the paper’s full text a URL
that points to a PDF, XML, or HTML version of
the complete paper (not just the abstract page).
Preferred sources (in order):
1. PubMed Central (PMC) full text HTML prefer the
HTML article page (e.g. /articles/PMCxxxx/)
over the PDF version
2. arXiv PDF or HTML
3. Preprint servers (bioRxiv, medRxiv, SSRN, etc.)
4. Institutional or university repositories
5. Europe PMC (europepmc.org)
6. Open-access mirrors and aggregators
7. Any other freely accessible full-text link
CRITICAL RULES:
- The URL must point to the actual content (PDF, XML
, or HTML of the paper), NOT to a landing/
abstract page.
- The link MUST be freely and directly accessible
without login, CAPTCHA, JavaScript rendering,
or any form of authentication. The content will
be downloaded programmatically, so it must be
accessible via a simple HTTP GET.
- Avoid paywalled publisher websites they typically
block automated downloads even if the page
appears accessible in a browser. Prefer open
repositories and archives over publisher sites.
- ONLY return URLs you actually found via web search.
Do NOT guess or invent URLs.
- If you cannot find a freely accessible direct link
, return {"found": false}. Do NOT return a link
that requires any form of access control.
Respond with ONLY a valid JSON object no markdown
fences, no extra text:
{
"found": true,
"url": "<direct URL to full text PDF/XML/HTML>",
"format": "<pdf | xml | html>"
}
If you cannot find a link:
{
"found": false,
"url": "",
"format": ""
}
User prompt.
Paper title: {title}
B. Retrieval Cascade Implementation Details
This appendix provides additional implementation details
for the retrieval modules described in Sections 4.1.1 and
4.2.1. Both retrieval stages use a sequential cascade: stages
are attempted in order, and the cascade halts at the first
stage whose output satisfies the corresponding acceptance
criterion.
B.1. Citation Parsing
Before retrieval, the raw citation string r is parsed into
structured retrieval fields. In our implementation, the parser
extracts the following fields:
{arxiv id, doi, url, title}.
These fields determine which retrieval stages can be acti-
vated. For example, arXiv-based lookup is attempted only
when an arXiv identifier is available, DOI-based retrieval
requires a DOI, URL retrieval requires a non-DOI URL,
and title-based search requires a parsed title. This parsing
step standardizes heterogeneous citation formats into a com-
mon representation used by both the abstract and full-text
retrieval cascades.
B.2. Title Similarity Gate
For abstract retrieval, candidates returned by scholarly APIs
are validated using a lightweight title-similarity gate. Given
a cited title t
cite 
and a retrieved title 
ˆ
t, we compute word-
overlap similarity:
σ(ˆt, t
cite
) = 
|W (ˆt) ∩ W (t
cite
)|
max(|W (t
cite
)|, 1) 
, (5)
11

DEEPSCIVERIFY
where W (t) denotes the set of lowercased alphanumeric
tokens after removing common English stop words. Unless
otherwise stated, we use an acceptance threshold of τ =
0.30. A retrieved abstract is accepted only if it is non-empty
and its title similarity satisfies σ ≥ τ .
B.3. Abstract Retrieval Cascade
The abstract retrieval cascade is organized into four tiers,
moving from structured identifiers to broader fallback meth-
ods.
Identifier-based retrieval. If an arXiv identifier is avail-
able, the system first queries the arXiv API and then attempts
Semantic Scholar lookup by arXiv ID.
DOI-based retrieval. If a DOI is available, the system
queries Semantic Scholar and OpenAlex using DOI-based
lookup. This stage provides high-precision retrieval when
publisher identifiers are present.
Title-based retrieval. If identifier-based retrieval fails or
no identifiers are available, the system performs title-based
search across Semantic Scholar, CrossRef, OpenAlex, and
PubMed. Candidate results from these stages are filtered
using the title-similarity gate described above.
Fallback retrieval. If structured retrieval fails, the system
attempts direct URL-based retrieval when a URL is present,
followed by LLM-assisted web search as a final fallback.
The LLM search prompt requires the model to return only
abstracts from papers actually found through web search
and to return a negative result rather than fabricate a match.
B.4. Full-Text Retrieval Cascade
The full-text retrieval cascade is similarly organized into
progressively broader stages.
Direct retrieval. If the citation contains a URL, the sys-
tem first attempts to fetch the document directly. HTML
pages are converted to text, and PDFs are parsed into text
when possible.
arXiv retrieval. If an arXiv identifier is available, the
system retrieves the arXiv HTML version when available,
preferring it because it is typically cleaner for text extraction.
If HTML retrieval fails, the system falls back to the arXiv
PDF.
Open-access retrieval. If earlier stages fail, the system
searches open-access sources, including Semantic Scholar
open-access PDF links and PubMed Central XML. Re-
trieved documents are converted into raw text for down-
stream passage extraction.
Fallback retrieval. As a final stage, the system uses LLM-
assisted web search to locate a direct full-text URL. The
prompt asks for a freely accessible PDF, XML, or HTML
version of the paper, prioritizing open repositories such as
PubMed Central, arXiv, preprint servers, and institutional
repositories. Returned URLs are fetched programmatically
and must pass the same quality checks as other full-text
sources.
B.5. Full-Text Acceptance Criteria
Full-text candidates are accepted only if they provide suf-
ficient usable content. Specifically, a retrieved document
must contain at least 1,500 characters of extracted text and
must not match common correction or erratum patterns. We
filter documents whose extracted text begins with indicators
such as correction for, erratum, corrigendum, retraction
notice, author correction, or publisher’s note. These checks
reduce cases where the retrieved document is not the target
paper but rather a correction, notice, or metadata page.
B.6. Diagnostics
Each retrieval call records the source that produced the final
result, the fetched URL when applicable, and a stage-level
log of attempted retrieval steps. These logs are used for
post-hoc analysis of retrieval failures and for attributing
downstream errors to retrieval, passage extraction, or verifi-
cation.
C. Model and Experiment Configuration
Table 5 summarizes the model, retrieval, and reproducibility
settings used in the main DEEPSCIVERIFY experiments.
The main pipeline uses OpenAI models for verification,
retrieval fallbacks, and embeddings, while Claude Sonnet
4.6 and Gemini 2.5 Flash are included as baseline models
through their respective API providers. All thresholds and
retrieval parameters were fixed before evaluation on the
SCITANCE test split.
D. Escalation Analysis
Table 6 analyzes how often DEEPSCIVERIFY uses each
stage. Of the 91 test instances, 61 (67.0%) are resolved at
Phase 1 through early exit, and 57 of these are correct. The
remaining 30 instances (33.0%) are escalated to Phase 2 for
passage-level verification.
Escalation has a positive net effect. Phase 2 corrects 13
instances that were initially unresolved at the abstract level
and correctly leaves 9 additional cases as NEI. However, it
also flips 7 instances to an incorrect verdict, showing that
passage-level evidence can introduce noise when retrieval
or evidence interpretation is imperfect. Overall, Phase 2
12

DEEPSCIVERIFY
Table 5: Model, retrieval, and reproducibility details for the main DEEPSCIVERIFY experiments.
Item Configuration
Models used The main DEEPSCIVERIFY pipeline uses gpt-5.4 as the abstract-level verifier in Phase 1 and
gpt-4 as the passage-level verifier in Phase 2. LLM-assisted retrieval fallbacks use gpt-5.2,
and the RAG passage retriever uses text-embedding-3-small. Baseline comparisons
additionally use GPT-4, GPT-5.4, Claude Sonnet 4.6, and Gemini 2.5 Flash.
API providers OpenAI is used for the main DEEPSCIVERIFY pipeline, including verifier models, embedding
calls, and web-search-augmented retrieval. Anthropic is used for Claude Sonnet 4.6 baselines,
and the Google AI API is used for Gemini 2.5 Flash baselines. Non-LLM retrieval uses arXiv,
Semantic Scholar, CrossRef, OpenAlex, and NCBI E-utilities for PubMed and PubMed Central.
Decoding settings All LLM calls use temperature 0. Reasoning effort is set to low for the abstract-level verifier.
Web-search-augmented retrieval calls use the OpenAI web search preview tool.
Abstract retrieval The Phase 1 title-similarity gate uses word overlap with threshold τ = 0.30. Abstract candidates
are accepted only when non-empty and sufficiently title-matched to the parsed citation.
Full-text retrieval The Phase 2 full-text gate requires at least L
min 
= 1,500 extracted characters and filters
correction, erratum, corrigendum, retraction, author-correction, and publisher-note documents.
PDF extraction is capped at 5 × 10
5 
characters.
Passage retrieval The RAG passage extractor uses section-aware chunking, chunk size 3,000 characters, overlap
200, cosine-similarity threshold 0.50, and top-k = 2 retrieved chunks. Retrieved chunks are
concatenated and passed to the passage-level verifier.
Retry and caching 
Per-source rate limiting uses a minimum interval of δ = 1.0 s. Semantic Scholar requests
retry up to three times on HTTP 429 with exponential backoff. LLM-assisted abstract and
full-text web-search fallbacks allow up to two retries. The pipeline uses an in-memory cache to
deduplicate requests within a run, but predictions and retrieval results are not persisted across
runs.
Experiment period Experiments were run between March 23 and March 27, 2026.
adds 13 correct predictions while introducing 7 new errors,
yielding a net gain of 6 correct predictions. This accounts for
the +4.5 Micro-F1 improvement over the strongest abstract-
only baseline.
Table 6: Escalation behavior of DEEPSCIVERIFY on the
SCITANCE test set in the three-class setting. Phase 1 per-
forms abstract-level verification, while Phase 2 applies RAG-
based passage extraction followed by passage-level verifica-
tion.
Statistic Count (%)
Total test instances 91 (100%)
Resolved at Phase 1 (early exit) 61 (67.0%)
Correct 57 (62.6%)
Incorrect 4 (4.4%)
Escalated to Phase 2 30 (33.0%)
Corrected by Phase 2 13 (14.3%)
Remained NEI (correctly) 9 (9.9%)
Remained NEI (incorrectly) 1 (1.1%)
Flipped to wrong verdict 7 (7.7%)
E. Retrieval Coverage and Latency Analysis
To evaluate the coverage and runtime behavior of the re-
trieval modules, we ran both the abstract and full-text re-
trieval cascades on the unique cited papers appearing across
the SCITANCE train, development, and test splits. This anal-
ysis uses 412 unique papers after deduplication. Because
some papers appear in multiple splits, the per-split totals
sum to 527 paper–split occurrences rather than 412 unique
papers.
E.1. Retrieval Latency
Table 7 summarizes retrieval latency. Abstract retrieval is
relatively stable, with a median latency of 4.10 seconds per
paper and a p95 of 6.89 seconds. Full-text retrieval has a
lower median latency of 1.96 seconds, but a substantially
heavier tail, with a mean of 12.49 seconds and p95 of 56.70
seconds. This reflects the variability of full-text access:
many papers are retrieved quickly from structured sources
such as PubMed Central, while fallback web search and
document parsing can be much slower.
These latency results further motivate the staged design of
DEEPSCIVERIFY. Since full-text retrieval can be substan-
tially more expensive and variable than abstract retrieval,
escalating only uncertain cases reduces unnecessary full-
text processing while still enabling deeper verification when
abstract evidence is insufficient.
13

DEEPSCIVERIFY
Table 7: Latency of the retrieval cascades over 412 unique papers.
Stage Total time Median Mean P95 Max
Abstract retrieval 28m37.49s 4.10s 4.17s 6.89s 9.13s
Full-text retrieval 1h25m46.02s 1.96s 12.49s 56.70s 97.76s
End-to-end run 1h54m23.53s – – – –
E.2. Retrieval Coverage
Table 8 summarizes overall retrieval coverage. The abstract
retrieval cascade successfully retrieves abstracts for 391
of 412 unique papers (94.9%). Full-text retrieval is more
difficult but still succeeds for 333 papers (80.8%). Only 5
papers (1.2%) have neither abstract nor full-text evidence
retrieved.
Table 8: Retrieval coverage over 412 unique papers in SCI-
TANCE.
Retrieval outcome Count Percentage
Abstract retrieved 391 / 412 94.9%
Abstract missing 21 / 412 5.1%
Full text retrieved 333 / 412 80.8%
Abstract only 74 / 412 18.0%
No evidence retrieved 5 / 412 1.2%
Table 9 reports the source distribution for successful re-
trievals. Abstract retrieval is primarily resolved through
PubMed and OpenAlex, while full-text retrieval is domi-
nated by PubMed Central, with LLM-assisted web search
recovering an additional 24.0% of successful full-text cases.
This supports the use of a multi-source cascade: no sin-
gle source covers all cited papers, and the fallback stages
recover a non-trivial fraction of evidence.
Table 9: Source distribution among successful abstract and
full-text retrievals. Percentages are computed within each
successful retrieval group.
Retrieval type Source Count Share
Abstract PubMed 192 49.1%
Abstract OpenAlex 155 39.6%
Abstract CrossRef 44 11.3%
Full text PubMed Central 253 76.0%
Full text LLM web search 80 24.0%
For completeness, Table 10 reports coverage by split before
deduplication across splits. Coverage is broadly consistent
across train, development, and test partitions.
Table 10: Retrieval coverage by SCITANCE split. Counts
are computed over paper–split occurrences, so totals may
exceed the number of unique papers.
Split Papers Abs. found Abs. % FT found FT %
Dev 94 88 93.6% 79 84.0%
Test 85 81 95.3% 73 85.9%
Train 348 330 94.8% 279 80.2%
Total 527 499 94.7% 431 81.8%
14
