
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2606.10625

snaproot: Decentralized File Integrity Verification
Using Blockchain-Anchored Cryptographic Hashing
Arslan Brömme
∗ 
and Tarkan Yavas
†
Chain Horizon GmbH
Version 0.9.9.3 (Working Draft)
Preprint / working paper. This version is a work in progress and may be updated. Comments
are welcome.
Abstract
The rapid growth of digital content has made reliable integrity verification increasingly
important. Existing solutions rely either on centralized authorities, which introduce trust
dependencies and single points of failure, or on decentralized storage systems that incur
prohibitive resource overhead. In this paper, we present snaproot, a lightweight system that
implements the hash-anchoring paradigm of Haber and Stornetta on the Solana blockchain
to provide efficient, decentralized file integrity verification. snaproot generates a SHA-256
hash of a file and stores it immutably on-chain as a permanent reference record. Verifica-
tion is performed by recomputing the hash and comparing it to the stored value, yielding a
deterministic binary outcome. Beyond the basic anchoring mechanism, we describe a four-
tier trust architecture comprising three realized tiers — user sovereignty through locally
generated keys, within-chain immutability through consensus, and cross-fork verifiability —
and one prospective tier consisting of a planned cross-chain migration mechanism for long-
term persistence beyond the lifetime of any single blockchain. We present a formal threat
model, a security analysis grounded in the second-preimage resistance of SHA-256, and an
empirical evaluation on Solana Devnet across file sizes from 1 KB to 500 MB, with sub-five-
second confirmation latency on Devnet that supports capture-time anchoring of photographs
as a practical workflow for typical network conditions. The system is deployed on Solana
Mainnet; a formal characterization under Mainnet load is left to future work. A central
conceptual contribution of this work is the explicit structural separation between existence
proof — the chain-resident, key-independent claim that a file existed at a given time — and
authorship proof — the key-dependent binding between a record and a specific wallet iden-
tity. This separation, which is absent or implicit in most prior hash-anchoring designs, allows
existence guarantees to survive key loss, organisational change, and provider disappearance,
while preserving the ability to make stronger authorship claims where keys are retained.
We position snaproot against established hash-anchoring systems (OpenTimestamps, Ori-
ginStamp, Chainpoint) and discuss limitations with respect to pre-registration manipulation
and AI-generated content.
Keywords— blockchain, file integrity, cryptographic hashing, decentralized verification, Solana,
digital trust, capture-time anchoring
∗
Dipl.-Inform., B.Sc., CISSP, CISA, CISM, CAISE. arslanb@chain-horizon.com
†
M.Eng., CISM, ISO27001 Lead Auditor, CAISE. tarkan.yavas@chain-horizon.com
1
arXiv:2606.10625v1 [cs.CR] 9 Jun 2026

1 Introduction
The integrity of digital files is fundamental to a wide range of applications, including legal
documentation, digital forensics, medical recordkeeping, and content authentication. Unlike
physical documents, digital files can be silently modified without leaving any visible trace, making
post-hoc verification difficult [1]. This challenge has grown significantly more complex with the
proliferation of generative artificial intelligence, which enables the creation of highly realistic
synthetic content that is often indistinguishable from authentic material by visual inspection
alone [2].
Traditional approaches to data integrity rely on centralized mechanisms such as digital signa-
tures issued by certificate authorities, proprietary timestamping services, or notarial registries.
While these approaches can function adequately in controlled environments, they share a struc-
tural limitation that no implementation quality can remove: the integrity claim ultimately de-
pends on the continued correct operation of a single, trusted authority. The 2011 compromise of
the DigiNotar certificate authority illustrates this limitation concretely: a single intrusion enabled
the issuance of hundreds of fraudulent certificates, and users had no independent mechanism to
verify whether a given certificate had been manipulated or legitimately issued [3]. Centralized
authorities can be coerced, compromised, or simply disappear, taking the integrity claims they
support with them.
Blockchain technology offers a structurally different alternative. A distributed, publicly au-
ditable ledger removes the dependency on any single party for record persistence. Once data is
written and confirmed, it cannot be altered without network-wide consensus, making blockchains
an attractive substrate for long-term integrity anchoring. However, directly storing large files on-
chain is prohibitively expensive and technically impractical. A lightweight alternative is to store
only the cryptographic hash of a file, which serves as a compact and verifiable fingerprint [4]. The
hash-anchoring paradigm, originally proposed by Haber and Stornetta [5], operationalizes this
principle and has been instantiated in systems such as OpenTimestamps [6], OriginStamp [7],
and Chainpoint [8].
In this paper, we present snaproot, a system that combines SHA-256 hashing with on-chain
hash anchoring on the Solana blockchain. snaproot is a concrete realization of the hash-anchoring
paradigm on a high-throughput blockchain substrate, with confirmation latencies in the single-
digit seconds range rather than the minutes or hours required by Bitcoin-based predecessors. This
latency profile is a qualitative enabler for use cases that are impractical on slower substrates under
typical conditions, most notably capture-time anchoring, in which a photograph is hashed and
registered on-chain within the user’s natural shutter-to-preview window. The system is deployed
on Solana Mainnet and is in productive use.
1.1 The Trust Architecture
Rather than positioning snaproot primarily as a performance improvement over existing hash-
anchoring systems, this paper develops a more fundamental claim: snaproot realizes a layered
trust architecture in which integrity claims depend on no single trusted party and remain veri-
fiable across organizational, technological, and generational boundaries. We describe this archi-
tecture in four tiers:
• User sovereignty. Each snaproot installation generates a Solana keypair locally. The
private key never leaves the user’s device. Records are signed under the user’s own wallet,
and verification requires only the original file, a transaction identifier, and access to any
Solana RPC endpoint — no interaction with snaproot infrastructure is needed. The user
is structurally independent of the provider; if snaproot as an organization were to cease
operation, existing records would remain fully verifiable.
• Within-chain integrity. Once confirmed on Solana, records are protected by consensus
2

and the second-preimage resistance of SHA-256. A modification of a registered file is
detectable with deterministic certainty, and reversing a confirmed record would require
breaking consensus on a supermajority of staked validators.
• Cross-fork verifiability. Past records survive protocol-level disruptions of the substrate.
The Solana network has undergone protocol changes and recovery events; however, these
affect the liveness of the network for new anchorings, not the safety of records already
on archived chain history. As long as at least one archive of the relevant chain segment
remains accessible, the existence of an anchored record can be verified, and any tampering
with chain history becomes detectable through comparison of independently maintained
archives.
• Cross-chain trust migration. snaproot is designed with the prospect of substrate in-
dependence in mind. In the planned mechanism, the hashes recorded on Solana could be
aggregated by the user and re-anchored on a different blockchain (for example, Ethereum)
through a user-initiated, wallet-bound migration. This mechanism is described as an out-
look rather than an active development item; its purpose, if realized, would be to ensure
that the choice of Solana remains operational rather than architectural, so that the system
can outlive the lifetime of any single blockchain.
An important consequence of this architecture is the structural separation of two properties
that are conflated in many alternative designs. The existence proof for a registered file — the
cryptographic claim that the file existed in its current form at the time of registration — is
independent of any specific key custody. It can be verified by anyone with access to the file and
a working RPC endpoint, indefinitely, and remains intact even if the registrant’s private key is
later lost. The authorship proof — the cryptographic binding between the record and a specific
wallet identity — is key-dependent and is forfeited if the private key is lost. This separation
allows snaproot to support both identified and pseudonymous integrity claims, and to provide
existence guarantees that survive scenarios in which authorship claims would not.
1.2 Applications
The trust architecture is general and supports a range of applications. We discuss two illustrative
domains in this paper.
Media authenticity against AI-generated content. The deterministic nature of hash com-
parison provides a counterpoint to the inherently probabilistic approaches based on AI-based
detection. Where a detector classifies an image as authentic or manipulated with some confi-
dence that degrades against unfamiliar generators [2, 9], snaproot answers a different and stricter
question: whether a specific file has changed since its on-chain registration. When combined with
capture-time anchoring — registering the photograph at the moment of capture, before any mod-
ification opportunity — this shifts the trust boundary from "the asserted creator" to "the capture
pipeline of a specific app and device", a substantially smaller and more auditable surface.
Tamper-evident records for compliance. Audit logs, regulatory records, and other documen-
tation subject to integrity requirements typically rely on organizationally controlled storage or
signed archives. The integrity claim then depends on the same organization that may also benefit
from manipulation. Anchoring such records to a decentralized ledger removes this conflict: an
auditor or regulator can verify integrity externally, without relying on the audited organization’s
own infrastructure.
1.3 Contributions
The main contributions of this work are:
3

1. A four-tier trust architecture for blockchain-anchored integrity verification, of which three
tiers are fully realized in the deployed system — user sovereignty, within-chain integrity,
and cross-fork verifiability — and one tier (substrate-independent cross-chain migration)
is developed as a coherent prospective design rather than an implemented mechanism.
We identify and discuss the structural separation of existence proof and authorship proof,
which clarifies the security guarantees of the system and distinguishes them from those of
alternative designs.
2. A practical Solana implementation of the architecture, deployed on Mainnet, including
capture-time anchoring of photographs as a functional demonstration of how the substrate’s
latency characteristics enable specific application classes that are structurally infeasible on
slower-confirmation substrates.
3. A formal threat model with a security reduction to the second-preimage resistance of SHA-
256, covering non-registrant modification, replay, timestamp manipulation, and duplicate
registration, together with an empirical evaluation on Solana Devnet measuring hashing
performance, confirmation latency, cost, and sustained throughput.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3
defines the threat model and problem formulation. Section 4 describes the system architecture
and protocols, including capture-time anchoring. Section 5 provides a security analysis along
the four tiers of the trust architecture. Section 6 presents the empirical evaluation. Section 7
discusses limitations, the active roadmap, and the longer-term outlook including cross-chain
migration. Section 8 discusses the trust architecture in the context of media authenticity and
compliance applications. Section 9 concludes.
2 Related Work
We discuss prior work in five areas relevant to snaproot’s positioning: blockchain-based times-
tamping and hash anchoring, decentralized storage, on-chain ownership records and NFTs, AI-
based content authentication, and tamper-evident logging systems. Throughout, we focus on the
specific properties that distinguish snaproot from each line of work, rather than on a compre-
hensive survey.
2.1 Blockchain-Based Timestamping and Hash Anchoring
The use of a tamper-evident chain to establish temporal ordering and provenance of digital doc-
uments was pioneered by Haber and Stornetta [5], predating modern blockchains by nearly two
decades. Several systems instantiate this concept on public blockchains. OpenTimestamps [6]
anchors hash values on the Bitcoin blockchain using Merkle aggregation, allowing a single Bit-
coin transaction to attest to arbitrarily many documents. Its design is fully permissionless
and provides strong long-term guarantees by inheriting Bitcoin’s settlement assurances; how-
ever, Bitcoin’s confirmation window of approximately sixty minutes makes it unsuitable for
latency-sensitive applications. OriginStamp [7], while presented by its authors as a decentral-
ized timestamping service, in practice relies on a centralized aggregation backend that batches
client hashes before anchoring their Merkle root to Bitcoin; this operational centralization par-
tially undermines its end-to-end trust guarantees, as users depend on the continued operation
and honesty of the aggregation service. Chainpoint [8] and related hash-aggregation services
such as Factom, Woleet, and Po.et similarly provide Merkle-tree-based anchoring on Bitcoin or
Ethereum, typically operated as managed services that batch many client hashes into a single
on-chain root.
These systems share with snaproot the basic hash-anchoring paradigm but differ along three
properties central to the present work. First, user sovereignty: in snaproot, each installation
4

generates a Solana keypair locally and the user signs each record under their own wallet, so
that the verification path does not require the operator’s infrastructure. In contrast, Merkle-
aggregation services typically place the user’s hashes inside an operator-controlled aggregation
step, and verification depends on the operator’s continued willingness and ability to provide
Merkle proofs. Second, latency profile: snaproot’s sub-five-second confirmation latency on Solana
(Devnet; see Section 6) supports use cases that are impractical on Bitcoin-based substrates
under typical conditions, most notably the capture-time anchoring of photographs discussed in
Section 4. Third, substrate independence: snaproot is designed such that hashes anchored on one
chain can be aggregated and re-anchored on another at user initiative, decoupling the long-term
verifiability of records from the lifetime of any single blockchain. We return to this point in
Sections 5 and 7.
The current snaproot implementation anchors one hash per transaction and does not perform
on-chain Merkle aggregation; we discuss this design choice and its implications in Section 7.
Table 1 summarises the comparison along the dimensions most relevant to the trust archi-
tecture developed in this paper.
Table 1: Comparison of hash-anchoring systems along trust-architecture dimensions. ✓ = property
holds by design; ◦ = partially or with caveats; – = property absent or structurally precluded. Provider-
independence: verification requires no operator cooperation. User-signed records: each record carries the
user’s own cryptographic signature. Capture-time anchoring: confirmation latency supports synchronous
photo registration. Existence/authorship separation: system explicitly separates the two proof types.
Property OTS OriginStamp Chainpoint snaproot
Provider-independent verification ◦ – ◦ ✓
User-signed records – – – ✓
Per-user authorship proof – – – ✓
Capture-time anchoring – – – ✓
Existence / authorship separation – – – ✓
No operator aggregation step ✓ – – ✓
Long-term substrate independence ✓ ◦ ◦ ◦
†
Permissionless access ✓ ◦ ◦ ✓
†
Prospective; cross-chain migration is a planned outlook feature, not yet implemented.
The most consequential differences are in the first four rows. Provider-independent verifica-
tion and user-signed records are architectural properties that derive from snaproot’s local-wallet
model; they are absent in Merkle-aggregation services because the user’s hash is processed inside
an operator-controlled aggregation step, and verification depends on the operator supplying the
Merkle proof. The explicit separation of existence proof and authorship proof is a conceptual
contribution of the present work and is not discussed in the prior systems. Capture-time an-
choring is a latency-driven property that is structurally precluded on Bitcoin-based substrates.
Long-term substrate independence is the one dimension on which OpenTimestamps holds a gen-
uine advantage: Bitcoin’s archive ecosystem is more decentralised and longer-established than
Solana’s, and snaproot’s cross-chain migration path is prospective rather than realised.
2.2 Decentralized Storage Systems
IPFS [10] provides a content-addressed distributed storage layer in which files are identified by
their content hash (CID). While this enables integrity checking as a side effect, the system is
designed primarily for data distribution and availability, not for authoritative integrity verifica-
tion: the same CID can be served by any participating node, and long-term persistence depends
on external pinning services or the Filecoin incentive layer [11], introducing variable costs and
operational dependencies. snaproot takes a fundamentally different approach: file content is
never transmitted or stored by the system. Only the hash is anchored on-chain, eliminating
5

storage overhead while retaining full integrity verification capability. The two approaches are
complementary rather than competing: a workflow that requires both content availability and
authoritative integrity could combine IPFS-based storage with snaproot-based anchoring.
2.3 Blockchain Ownership and NFTs
Non-fungible tokens (NFTs) associate digital assets with on-chain ownership records [12]. How-
ever, many NFT implementations store asset data or metadata off-chain and reference it through
a TokenURI or external storage service. Prior work on ERC-721 metadata permanence shows
that a substantial share of NFT assets depend on non-permanent, centralized, or mutable stor-
age [13], meaning the on-chain ownership record alone does not guarantee file integrity — an
asset can be transferred on-chain while its underlying content is silently replaced off-chain. snap-
root differs fundamentally by anchoring the hash of the actual file contents directly on-chain.
Any subsequent modification of the file is immediately detectable, regardless of how the file is
stored or distributed. Ownership and integrity are orthogonal properties; snaproot addresses the
latter without making claims about the former.
2.4 AI-Based Content Authentication
A growing body of literature applies machine learning to detect AI-generated or manipulated
content [2, 9]. Although these approaches have achieved high accuracy on known generative ar-
chitectures, they are inherently probabilistic and degrade as generation quality improves. Rössler
et al. [2] showed, in the context of FaceForensics++, that detectors trained on a single manipula-
tion method generalize substantially worse than those trained across the full set of manipulation
methods in the dataset, indicating strong sensitivity to the training distribution. Content au-
thenticity standards such as C2PA [14] embed signed provenance metadata at creation time,
which is complementary but requires tool-level adoption by content producers and depends on
the integrity of the signing infrastructure.
snaproot is orthogonal to both approaches: rather than classifying content, it verifies whether
a previously registered file has been altered. The verification answer is binary and determinis-
tic, with soundness reducing to the second-preimage resistance of SHA-256. Used together with
point-of-capture mechanisms — either C2PA-conformant hardware or the capture-time anchor-
ing path implemented in snaproot itself — the deterministic post-hoc verification provided by
anchoring and the provenance signal provided by capture-time mechanisms reinforce each other.
2.5 Tamper-Evident Logging and Certificate Transparency
Certificate Transparency [15] uses append-only, cryptographically verifiable Merkle tree logs to
provide auditable records of TLS certificates. This architecture shares snaproot’s core tamper-
evident property but is domain-specific and relies on a fixed set of designated log operators; users
must trust the federated operator set to behave honestly. snaproot generalizes the concept to
arbitrary files using a fully permissionless blockchain substrate, eliminating the need for trusted
log operators. The motivating example from Section 1 — the DigiNotar compromise of 2011 [3]
— illustrates the failure mode that both Certificate Transparency and snaproot are designed to
make detectable: a trusted authority that quietly behaves dishonestly. The two systems address
this concern in different domains and at different layers, but with structurally similar primitives.
3 Threat Model and Problem Formulation
We define the adversary model, security goals, and assumptions under which snaproot operates.
The goals are structured to make explicit the four tiers of the trust architecture introduced in Sec-
6

tion 1: user sovereignty, within-chain integrity, cross-fork verifiability, and substrate-independent
migration.
3.1 Adversary Model
We consider a probabilistic polynomial-time (PPT) adversary A with full read access to the
public state of the Solana blockchain, including all anchored hash records, transaction metadata,
and timestamps. The adversary may also observe the broader public environment: the existence
of files registered by other users, the wallet pubkeys of registrants, and any metadata associated
with anchored records.
The primary threat that snaproot must resist is the post-registration substitution of a reg-
istered file by a different file that nonetheless passes verification. Given a registered file F with
hash H = SHA256(F ), this corresponds to A finding F 
′
̸
 
= F with SHA256(F 
′
) = H — that is,
a second-preimage attack against SHA-256. Specifically, A may attempt to:
• Observe any registered hash value and the public key of the registrant, and any associated
metadata.
• Modify the contents of a registered file F to produce F 
′ 
and present F 
′ 
as passing verifi-
cation against the original registration. This is a second-preimage attack and constitutes
the primary threat.
• Forge or retroactively modify a blockchain record so as to validate a modified file.
• Mount a full preimage attack: given H, attempt to find any F 
′ 
with SHA256(F 
′
) = H.
This is strictly harder than the second-preimage attack and is included for completeness.
• Mount a collision attack: find F and F 
′ 
with F̸ = F 
′ 
and SHA256(F ) = SHA256(F 
′
).
This threat is primarily relevant in the stronger sub-case of a malicious registrant who
commits to F but later attempts to substitute a precomputed F 
′
. It therefore affects the
non-repudiation property rather than the core integrity guarantee.
Out of scope. We assume that A cannot break the computational hardness assumptions
underlying SHA-256 and cannot compromise the consensus mechanism of the Solana network.
Network-level attacks against Solana’s validator set are outside the scope of application-layer
integrity verification.
Frontrunning as a known limitation. A specific concern that the current implementation
does not actively defend against is timestamp frontrunning of registration transactions. The pri-
mary planned mitigation is the salted anchoring construction H
anchor 
= SHA256(F ∥ s) described
in Section 7.2; we introduce the threat here so that the mitigation in the roadmap can be read in
context. An adversary A who learns of an unconfirmed registration — or who otherwise obtains
the file before the legitimate user has anchored it — may submit a competing memo transaction
with the same hash under their own wallet, attempting to be confirmed first and thereby es-
tablishing an earlier on-chain existence claim. Because snaproot does not enforce protocol-level
uniqueness on hashes (Section 4.4), the legitimate user’s own anchor is not displaced; their exis-
tence claim remains valid from their own anchor time onward. The damage is therefore narrower
than displacement: the adversary can claim that the file existed earlier than it actually did under
their identity, which manufactures a competing narrative about provenance even though it does
not invalidate the legitimate registrant’s record. In practice, this attack requires A to know the
file F before its registration is confirmed, which restricts the threat to scenarios where the file is
leaked, intercepted, or shared with a malicious party prior to anchoring. A planned salt mecha-
nism (Section 7) mitigates this by computing the anchor as SHA256(F ∥ s) with a user-controlled
salt s, so that an adversary in possession of F alone cannot construct a competing anchor that
matches the legitimate one. We discuss this trade-off explicitly in Section 7.
7

3.2 Security Goals
Let F denote a file, H = SHA256(F ) its hash, W the public key of the registering wallet, and
B the blockchain ledger. snaproot is designed to satisfy the following properties:
(G1) Integrity. If B contains H at time t, then any F 
′
̸
 
= F submitted for verification at time
t
′ 
> t produces H
′
̸
 
= H (except with negligible probability), and the verification protocol
returns FALSE.
(G2) Existence-proof persistence. The claim “a file with hash H existed at time t” remains
independently verifiable for any party with access to F and to any archive of B that
includes the record, regardless of the continued availability of the registrant’s private key.
This property is structural: it follows from the persistence of B and from the public
verifiability of the hash, and is orthogonal to authorship.
(G3) Non-repudiation (authorship). So long as the private key corresponding to W is held
by the registrant, the cryptographic binding between the record and W is irrevocable: the
registrant cannot deny having signed the registration. If the private key is lost, the author-
ship claim becomes unprovable, but Integrity (G1) and Existence-proof persistence (G2)
remain intact.
(G4) Public verifiability. Any party with read access to B can independently perform ver-
ification, given F and the transaction identifier. No cooperation or involvement of the
original registrant is required.
(G5) Provider independence. Verification of any record requires only F , the transaction
identifier, and access to any functioning Solana RPC endpoint. It does not require in-
teraction with snaproot’s infrastructure, services, or web frontend, nor with any specific
operator. Records remain verifiable even if snaproot as an organization ceases to operate.
(G6) Cross-fork verifiability. If B undergoes a fork or protocol-level disruption at time t
fork
,
records anchored before t
fork 
remain verifiable on any chain version that shares the pre-fork
history, provided at least one archive of that history is accessible. Discrepancies between
competing chain versions after t
fork 
are detectable through comparison, rather than hidden.
The separation between (G2) and (G3) is central to the trust architecture and is discussed
further in Section 5. It is what distinguishes snaproot from systems in which the loss of a single
secret invalidates both the existence claim and the authorship claim simultaneously.
3.3 Assumptions
The security analysis in Section 5 rests on the following assumptions:
• Hash function security. SHA-256 is second-preimage resistant: no PPT adversary,
given a fixed F , can find F 
′
̸
 
= F with SHA256(F 
′
) = SHA256(F ) with non-negligible
probability. Collision resistance, a strictly stronger property, is additionally assumed for
the malicious-registrant sub-case.
• Solana safety. We use the terms safety and liveness in their established distributed-
systems sense [16] — as subsequently standardized in the distributed-systems literature —
where safety means that no two honest participants accept conflicting histories, so that
confirmed blocks are never reverted; liveness means that the network continues to make
progress by confirming new transactions. For records already confirmed on B, we assume
that the Solana consensus mechanism maintains safety: confirmed blocks are not reverted,
and the history up to a confirmed block remains consistent across honest validators. We
distinguish this from liveness, the ability of the network to confirm new transactions in
8

a timely manner, which we do not assume to hold indefinitely. Past records depend on
safety; future anchorings depend on both safety and liveness.
• Pre-registration integrity. The registrant performs registration before any adversar-
ial modification of the file. snaproot provides no guarantee if an already-modified file
is registered. Combining snaproot with capture-time anchoring (Section 4) tightens this
assumption by reducing the window between file creation and registration to within the
substrate’s confirmation latency.
• Archive availability for long-term verification. For records to remain verifiable years
or decades after registration, at least one archive of the relevant chain history must remain
accessible. We do not assume that the same archive remains accessible indefinitely, nor
that any specific operator preserves it; we only assume that some archive of the relevant
pre-fork history exists. Section 7 discusses the cross-chain trust migration mechanism that
further weakens this assumption.
4 System Architecture
snaproot consists of three logical components: a Client Layer, a Hashing Module, and a Blockchain
Layer. The Client Layer is realized as a user-facing application; the Hashing Module operates
locally within that application; and the Blockchain Layer is implemented as a Solana program
(smart contract) deployed on Solana Mainnet. We describe each component, then specify the
registration and verification protocols and the capture-time anchoring workflow.
4.1 Overview
The data flow for the two main operations is summarized in Figure 1. In a registration, the user
submits a file to the Client Layer; the Hashing Module computes its SHA-256 digest; the Client
Layer constructs a Solana transaction containing this hash together with metadata, signs it
with the user’s locally held key, and submits it to the Blockchain Layer for inclusion on Solana.
In a verification, the user submits a file and the transaction identifier of a prior registration;
the Hashing Module recomputes the hash; the Client Layer retrieves the stored hash from the
Blockchain Layer and compares the two values, yielding a deterministic binary result.
Registration:
User → Client Layer → Hashing Module → Blockchain Layer
Verification:
User → Client Layer → Hash Comparison ← Stored Hash
Figure 1: System architecture and data flow for registration (top) and verification (bottom).
4.2 Client Layer and Local Key Management
The Client Layer provides the user-facing interface for file submission, verification, and result
presentation. It accepts files in any format, forwards raw bytes to the Hashing Module, manages
Solana wallet interactions for transaction signing, and displays results.
A key property of the Client Layer is its handling of cryptographic keys. During account
registration, each snaproot installation generates a fresh Solana keypair (Ed25519) locally; the
wallet is created as an integral part of the onboarding flow and is presented to the user at sign-up
time. The private key is stored exclusively on the user’s mobile device in the application’s local
secure storage and is never transmitted to snaproot servers, cloud services, or any third-party
service. All transaction signing is performed locally on the device; the private key does not leave
the device boundary at any point in the registration or verification workflow. The Blockchain
9

Layer accepts only transactions signed by the user’s own key. This realizes property (G5) of the
threat model (Section 3.2): verification of any record requires only the file, the transaction iden-
tifier, and access to any Solana RPC endpoint, with no dependency on snaproot infrastructure
for correctness.
The current implementation allows the user to export the private key from the snaproot
wallet; the exported key can be imported into any standard Solana wallet provider, so that the
user retains access to the wallet identity independently of snaproot. Importing an exported key
back into another snaproot installation is a feature scheduled for the next release; until then,
a user operating snaproot on multiple mobile devices generates a distinct wallet on each. The
user-sovereignty property of the trust architecture is unaffected either way: the private key is
held by the user, not by snaproot. We return to this point in Section 7.
The Client Layer is intentionally stateless with respect to file content: no file data is retained
after a request is processed. Anchor records and their associated metadata are retained locally
for the user’s reference, but the cryptographically relevant data — hash, registrant pubkey,
timestamp — lives on Solana.
4.3 Hashing Module
The Hashing Module applies SHA-256 [17] to the raw byte representation of the submitted
file. Processing is performed entirely locally; file contents are never transmitted to any external
service. SHA-256 was chosen for its widespread standardization, its strong security properties
under current cryptographic assumptions, and its high throughput on commodity hardware. The
empirical characterization of hashing throughput across file sizes is reported in Section 6.2.
In the current implementation, the anchor hash is computed directly as H
anchor 
= SHA256(F ),
where F is the raw file content. A planned extension introduces an optional user-controlled salt
parameter (Section 7), permitting independent parties to anchor identical files without conflict
and providing additional resistance against frontrunning.
4.4 Blockchain Layer and On-Chain Data Model
snaproot anchors each registration as a single Solana memo transaction. There is no dedicated
on-chain account per registration: the information that constitutes a snaproot record — the file
hash and the metadata — is carried as the payload of a transaction that invokes the standard
Solana memo program (program identifier MemoSq4gqABAXKb96qnH8TysNcWxMyWCqXgDLGmfcHr).
The choice of the memo program rather than a dedicated snaproot smart contract reflects
three deliberate design decisions. First, no rent-exempt deposit: dedicated Solana accounts
require a minimum SOL balance to remain rent-exempt; memo transactions require no such
deposit, so the record persists in ledger history without any ongoing cost. Second, permissionless
verifiability: the memo program is a standard, audited Solana program whose behaviour is
publicly known; a verifier needs no knowledge of a proprietary snaproot contract to retrieve
and interpret a record. Third, reduced attack surface: the integrity of the anchoring mechanism
depends only on the correctness of the standard memo program, not on the security of any
snaproot-specific on-chain logic. The trade-off is that the memo program does not enforce any
application-level constraints on payload structure; snaproot’s SR1 version prefix (Section 4.4)
provides the necessary format discipline at the application layer.
Once a memo transaction is confirmed, it becomes a permanent part of the Solana ledger
and can be retrieved by its transaction signature.
Payload structure and versioning. The memo payload is a UTF-8 plaintext string in a
pipe-separated format introduced in payload format version SR1. A representative payload has
the structure:
SR1|<SHA256>|<timestamp_ms>|<gps_or_null>|<salt>|<source>|<filetype>
10

where SR1 is the format version prefix, <SHA256> is the 64-character hex-encoded SHA-256 hash
of the file, <timestamp_ms> is the Unix timestamp in milliseconds at the time of client-side
submission, <gps_or_null> is the GPS coordinate string or null if location is unavailable or
denied, <salt> is reserved for the planned optional salt (Section 7.2), <source> identifies the
capture method (e.g. camera), and <filetype> identifies the file type (e.g. foto). The version
prefix SR1 allows future payload formats to be distinguished unambiguously from the current
one; a verifier encountering an unknown prefix can signal that the record requires a newer client
version. The Solana memo program imposes a payload size limit well in excess of what a snaproot
record requires; a representative SR1 payload occupies approximately 112 bytes.
Authorship and fee payment. A snaproot transaction is signed by the user’s locally held
wallet, which appears in the transaction as the signer of the memo and therefore as the crypto-
graphic author of the record (property G3, Section 3.2). Transaction fees are paid by a separate
snaproot-operated wallet, the relay wallet, which acts as both the Solana fee payer and a co-
signer of every user transaction. The Solana Program Instruction Logs confirm this explicitly:
each confirmed snaproot memo transaction records Signed by [relay_wallet] and Signed by
[user_wallet], with the relay wallet tagged as Fee Payer, Signer, and Writable, and the user
wallet tagged as Signer only. This structure has four consequences worth noting explicitly. First,
the user does not need to hold SOL to use snaproot; the relay wallet covers the network fee. Sec-
ond, the cryptographic authorship of each record remains with the user, because the user’s wallet
— not the relay wallet — is the memo signer, and this binding cannot be altered after confir-
mation. Third, the relay wallet’s co-signature constitutes a verifiable infrastructure authenticity
signal : because the relay wallet’s public key is known and published by snaproot, any verifier
can confirm that a given memo transaction was submitted through the snaproot relay infras-
tructure rather than by an independent party mimicking the memo format. A party wishing to
fabricate a snaproot-like record that passes this check must control the relay wallet’s private key.
Fourth, and importantly, a compromise of the relay wallet would affect only this infrastructure
authenticity signal: it would not affect file integrity (G1), existence-proof persistence (G2), or
authorship (G3), all of which depend solely on the user’s own key material and the immutability
of the confirmed transaction. We discuss this threat boundary explicitly in Section 5.8. The
relay wallet is an operational co-signer, not a custodian of records.
Implicit on-chain attributes. Three further attributes of a registration are derivable from
the confirmed transaction itself, without appearing as separate fields in the payload. The block
time recorded by the Solana runtime serves as the registration timestamp; it is set by consensus,
not by the client. The signer of the memo identifies the registrant. The transaction signature
(tx_id) is the canonical handle for later retrieval of the record.
No protocol-level uniqueness. Because each registration is an independent memo trans-
action, there is no protocol-enforced uniqueness constraint on hashes: the same hash may be
anchored in multiple memo transactions, potentially under different user wallets. The first con-
firmed memo transaction for a given hash is the earliest on-chain existence proof for that file;
subsequent anchorings of the same hash do not displace it, they simply add later existence proofs.
We return to the implications of this in Section 5.6.
Metadata storage. The metadata, like the hash, is part of the memo payload and is therefore
stored on-chain in cleartext. It is not part of the SHA-256 input over the file. Being on-chain,
the metadata inherits the same immutability as the rest of the transaction once confirmed;
what it does not inherit is a cryptographic binding to the file, since it does not enter the hash
computation. A planned extension (Section 7.2) will let the user choose, per use case, whether
11

metadata is anchored at all and, if so, in what form. We discuss the implications of the current
design choice in Section 5.
4.5 Registration Protocol
Algorithm 1 specifies the registration protocol. The client computes the hash, constructs the
memo payload from the hash and metadata, assembles a Solana transaction with the user’s
wallet as the memo signer and the snaproot relay wallet as the fee payer, has it co-signed and
submitted, and waits for confirmation. There is no on-chain existence check at registration time,
since no protocol-level uniqueness is enforced (Section 4.4).
Algorithm 1 RegisterFile(F , wallet, metadata)
1: H ← SHA256(F )
2: payload ← Encode(H, metadata)
3: tx ← BuildMemoTx(payload,
4: signer = wallet,
5: fee_payer = relay_wallet)
6: tx ← SignByUser(tx, wallet)
7: tx ← SignByRelay(tx, relay_wallet)
8: tx_id ← SubmitToBlockchain(tx)
9: AwaitConfirmation(tx_id)
10: return tx_id
4.6 Verification Protocol
Algorithm 2 specifies the verification protocol. The verifier recomputes the hash from the file,
retrieves the memo transaction from Solana by its transaction signature, extracts the anchored
hash from the memo payload, and compares the two values. The result is a deterministic binary
outcome.
Algorithm 2 VerifyFile(F , tx_id )
1: H
computed 
← SHA256(F )
2: tx ← FetchTransaction(tx_id)
3: if tx = NULL then
4: return Error(“Transaction not found on chain”)
5: end if
6: payload ← ExtractMemoPayload(tx)
7: H
stored 
← ParseHash(payload)
8: if H
computed 
= H
stored 
then
9: return TRUE ▷ Integrity confirmed
10: else
11: return FALSE ▷ File has been modified
12: end if
The verification protocol takes the transaction signature as input because it is the canonical
handle for the on-chain record. A planned extension (Section 7.2) will additionally support
verification when only the file and the user’s wallet public key are known: in that case, the
verifier scans the memo transactions of the user’s wallet and tests each one’s anchored hash
against the computed hash of the file, succeeding as soon as a match is found.
Verification can be executed against any Solana RPC endpoint: the official Mainnet end-
points, a self-hosted node, or third-party block explorers that expose the same RPC interface.
12

snaproot itself provides a web-based verification frontend as a convenience, but as established by
property (G5), this frontend is not on the critical verification path: the cryptographic operations
— hash recomputation and comparison — can be performed by any party with access to the file
and the transaction identifier.
4.7 Capture-Time Anchoring
In addition to the basic register/verify workflow described above, the snaproot application im-
plements capture-time anchoring for photographs. The workflow is integrated directly into the
camera function of the application:
1. The user takes a photograph through the snaproot camera interface.
2. The application presents a pre-submission screen showing a preview of the captured image,
an editable filename field, and the current GPS availability status. If location access has
been granted, the GPS coordinates are shown; if GPS is unavailable or has been denied, the
screen indicates “GPS not available — will be snaprooted without coordinates” and proceeds
without geolocation metadata. The user confirms by tapping the snaproot button.
3. Upon confirmation, the application computes the SHA-256 hash of the image bytes as
delivered by the device operating system’s camera API to the application. This is the
precise object of the integrity guarantee: snaproot anchors the image bytes as presented to
the application, not a claim about the physical capture process upstream of the OS camera
API.
4. The hash is immediately submitted to the Blockchain Layer for anchoring on Solana Main-
net, signed by the installation’s local wallet.
5. In parallel, the image is saved to the device’s normal photo library, with the corresponding
anchor record (transaction identifier, on-chain timestamp) retained by the application for
later reference.
The operational significance of this workflow is twofold. First, it narrows the window be-
tween content creation and on-chain anchoring to within the substrate’s confirmation latency
— a single-digit number of seconds on Solana — so that any adversary wishing to substitute a
manipulated image for the original must do so within this window or must control the capture
device itself. The trust boundary shifts from “the asserted creator” to “the capture pipeline of a
specific device and application instance”.
A precise characterisation of what is and is not proven is important for avoiding overclaims.
snaproot proves that a specific byte sequence existed at registration time and has not changed
since. Applied to a photograph taken through the snaproot camera interface, it proves that the
image bytes delivered by the OS camera API to the application existed at that time. It does not
independently prove that those bytes originated directly from the physical camera sensor without
intermediate processing by the OS, firmware, or hardware image signal processor (ISP). In prac-
tice, for images captured in the snaproot camera workflow on unmodified consumer hardware,
the gap between the physical capture and the OS-delivered bytes is narrow and auditable; but
the formal guarantee is scoped to the bytes the application received, not to the physical light
that entered the lens.
Second, the workflow demonstrates that the Solana latency profile is a qualitatively different
operating regime relative to Bitcoin-based anchoring systems, enabling this class of application
under typical network conditions. A workflow that required the user to wait approximately sixty
minutes for a Bitcoin confirmation, or ten minutes for an aggregated anchor to be batched and
submitted, would not be acceptable in the natural photography use case: the user would have
moved on, the shutter context would be lost, and the integration with the device’s normal photo
library would break down. Confirmation in the seconds range, by contrast, fits within the natural
13

shutter-to-preview window on a smartphone and allows the anchoring to remain invisible to the
user from a workflow perspective.
We discuss the security implications of capture-time anchoring, including its relationship to
the post-publication versus pre-publication adversary distinction, in Section 8.
5 Security Analysis
We analyze snaproot’s security properties along the goals defined in Section 3.2. The analysis
covers the three realized tiers of the trust architecture: user sovereignty (Section 5.4), within-
chain integrity (Sections 5.1–5.3), and cross-fork verifiability (Section 5.5). The fourth tier —
cross-chain trust migration — is a prospective design that is not yet implemented; its security
properties are discussed conceptually in Section 7.
Goal (G4) (public verifiability) does not receive a separate subsection because it follows
directly from (G5): if verification requires only the file, the transaction identifier, and any func-
tioning RPC endpoint, then any party who possesses these inputs can independently perform
verification — which is exactly what (G4) asserts. The argument is subsumed in Section 5.4.
5.1 Integrity (G1)
Theorem 5.1 (File Integrity). Let F be a file registered under hash H = SHA256(F ), and let
A be a PPT adversary. Assuming SHA-256 is second-preimage resistant, the probability that A
produces F 
′
̸
 
= F such that Algorithm 2 returns True on input (F 
′
, tx _id ) is negligible in the
security parameter λ.
Proof sketch. Algorithm 2 returns True if and only if SHA256(F 
′
) = SHA256(F ) = H. For
F 
′
̸
 
= F , this requires A to find a second preimage of H under SHA-256. By the second-preimage
resistance assumption, no PPT adversary can do so with non-negligible probability. Therefore
the probability of a false True is bounded by Adv
2pre
SHA256
(A, λ), which is negligible.
In the stronger sub-case where the registrant is adversarial, the relevant assumption is collision
resistance: a malicious registrant may commit to F and later attempt to substitute a precom-
puted F 
′ 
with SHA256(F 
′
) = SHA256(F ). Collision resistance of SHA-256, a strictly stronger
property, is also widely assumed to hold [17]. The integrity guarantee therefore covers both the
honest-registrant and malicious-registrant cases under their respective hardness assumptions.
5.2 Existence-Proof Persistence (G2)
A central design property of snaproot is the separation between the existence proof for a registered
file and the authorship proof. We make this property explicit here because it differs from the
security model of many alternative systems, in which both proofs collapse onto the same secret.
The existence proof for a registered file F is the verifiable claim that “a file with hash
H = SHA256(F ) existed at time t, with t established by the on-chain block timestamp of the
registration”. We claim that this proof remains verifiable for any party with access to F and to
any archive of B containing the record, regardless of the continued availability of the registrant’s
private key.
The argument is direct. The verification procedure of Algorithm 2 requires only F and the
transaction identifier; it does not require a signature operation by the registrant. The transaction
identifier and the corresponding record are public information on the blockchain, accessible to
any party with read access to B. The integrity of the record (G1) ensures that the value H
retrieved from B matches the registered hash, and the hash comparison SHA256(F ) 
?
= H is a
public computation that does not require any secret material from the registrant. The existence
proof is therefore structural: it inherits its persistence from the persistence of B, not from any
party’s key custody.
14

The practical consequences are substantial. A verifier who acquires a file F years after its
original registration can establish the existence proof autonomously, even if the original registrant
has long since lost their private key, lost their device, or ceased to be identifiable. snaproot
thereby provides a class of integrity claims that survive scenarios in which conventional signature-
based systems would silently fail.
5.3 Non-Repudiation and the Authorship Proof (G3)
The authorship proof is the cryptographic binding between a record and the wallet identity
W that signed it. This proof is established at registration time: the transaction is signed by
the private key corresponding to W , and the Solana consensus mechanism only incorporates
transactions with valid signatures. Once a transaction is confirmed on B, it becomes part of the
immutable distributed ledger. Solana’s consensus mechanism, built on Proof of History together
with a Tower-BFT-style finalization protocol [18], requires agreement from more than two-thirds
of staked validators to finalize a block. Reversing a confirmed record would therefore require
compromising this supermajority, which represents a prohibitive economic cost. The registrant’s
public key is permanently bound to the hash record, providing cryptographic non-repudiation of
the registration event.
Unlike (G2), this property is key-dependent. If the registrant retains control of the private
key corresponding to W , the authorship binding is indefinitely demonstrable: the registrant can
produce a fresh signature under W and thereby prove ongoing possession of the identity that
signed the original record. If the private key is lost, the authorship binding becomes unprovable:
any party with knowledge of the historical record can verify that some entity signed under W , but
the original registrant can no longer demonstrate that they are that entity through cryptographic
means alone.
It is important to note what this loss does not entail. The record itself does not change. No
third party gains the ability to claim authorship retroactively: such a claim would require either
producing the lost private key, which is by assumption infeasible, or forging a signature, which
reduces to breaking the underlying signature scheme. The loss of authorship provability is a loss
of personal demonstrability, not a transfer of the record’s cryptographic content.
We discuss in Section 8 a user-level workflow — the identity anchoring pattern — that allows
users to mitigate this limitation through the existing system, by anchoring an identity attestation
as their first record under a new wallet.
5.4 Provider Independence (G5)
Property (G5) asserts that verification requires only the file, the transaction identifier, and
access to any functioning Solana RPC endpoint. It does not require interaction with snaproot’s
infrastructure. We make the justification explicit.
The verification procedure (Algorithm 2) consists of three steps: hash recomputation, record
retrieval, and value comparison. Hash recomputation is local to the verifier and depends on
no external party. Record retrieval is a read against a public blockchain and may be served
by any Solana RPC endpoint, whether operated by snaproot, by an unrelated third party, by
a self-hosted node, or by any other source exposing the RPC interface. Value comparison is a
deterministic local operation.
It follows that the verification path contains no snaproot-specific trust assumption. The con-
venience web frontend operated by snaproot performs exactly these three steps, but its existence
is not on the critical path: the cryptographic content of the verification answer does not change
if the frontend is unavailable, untrusted, or replaced by an alternative implementation. Should
snaproot as an organization cease to operate, existing records remain fully verifiable through any
other RPC access path.
15

This property is what gives snaproot’s trust architecture its first tier (user sovereignty): the
user’s records belong to the user, in a sense that survives the disappearance of the system that
helped create them.
5.5 Cross-Fork Verifiability (G6)
Public blockchains undergo protocol changes, fork events, and recovery operations over their
operational lifetime. Solana in particular has experienced multiple network restarts and protocol-
level disruptions between 2022 and 2024. For long-term integrity claims, the relevant question is
not whether such events occur, but what they imply for records already confirmed at the time
they occur.
We distinguish between two aspects of decentralization. Liveness concerns the ability of
the network to confirm new transactions; it is sensitive to validator behavior at the time of
submission. Safety concerns the durability of records already confirmed; it is sensitive to the
post-hoc behavior of validators with respect to chain history. For snaproot, the relevant property
for existing records is safety, not liveness: once a record has been confirmed and a block has been
finalized, the question for verification is whether some archive of that block remains accessible,
not whether the network continues to accept new transactions.
Under this distinction, even an event that severely affects Solana’s liveness — such as a
network restart with coordinated validator participation — does not directly invalidate past
records. The pre-event chain history persists on the archives of all parties that held it before
the event, including independent block explorers, validator operators, and third-party indexing
services. A verifier seeking to check a pre-event record consults any such archive; if multiple
archives agree on the record, the verifier obtains a strong existence guarantee. If they disagree
— for example, if a fork produced two competing chain versions — the discrepancy is itself a
verifiable signal of tampering, not a hidden corruption.
This is a strictly weaker property than the corresponding guarantee on substrates with a
longer-running and more decentralized archive ecosystem (notably Bitcoin), and we do not claim
otherwise. Within these limits, the property rests primarily on the diversity and durability of
independent archives of the Solana chain history. For horizons that extend beyond the lifetime
of any specific chain, the prospective cross-chain migration mechanism discussed in Section 7.4
is intended to serve as an additional safety net rather than as the load-bearing argument for
long-term existence proofs.
5.6 Multiple Anchorings of the Same Hash
Because each registration is an independent memo transaction (Section 4.4), snaproot does not
enforce protocol-level uniqueness on the registered hash. The same hash may appear in several
memo transactions, possibly signed by different user wallets and at different times. We discuss
the implications.
For existence claims, the relevant property is that the earliest confirmed memo transaction
for a given hash establishes the earliest provable existence time of the file under any wallet.
Later anchorings of the same hash do not displace earlier ones; they simply add further existence
proofs at later timestamps. A verifier who wishes to determine the earliest on-chain existence
of a particular file scans for the earliest confirmed memo transaction whose payload matches
the file’s hash; if multiple wallets have anchored the same hash, all of those transactions remain
visible.
For non-repudiation claims (G3), the absence of a uniqueness constraint does not weaken the
binding between a specific anchor and its signing wallet: each memo transaction is signed by its
registrant’s wallet, and that signature cannot be transferred or forged without the corresponding
private key. Multiple wallets may anchor the same hash, but no wallet can claim authorship of
an anchor signed by a different wallet.
16

This design choice has an intentional consequence: independent parties can independently
attest to the existence of the same content (for example, a journalist and an archival service both
anchoring the same image), and all such attestations remain visible on-chain. A planned salt
mechanism (Section 7.2) will allow parties who instead want their anchors to be cryptographically
distinct to compute H
anchor 
= SHA256(F ∥ s) for a user-controlled salt s, giving different on-chain
anchor values for the same underlying file.
We note that this discussion concerns the protocol layer; classical replay attacks at the trans-
action level are handled by Solana’s standard mechanisms, and the frontrunning consideration
identified in Section 3.1 is discussed there.
5.7 Timestamp Integrity
The registration timestamp of a snaproot anchor is the block time of the memo transaction, set
by the Solana runtime at the moment of block inclusion. It is not part of the memo payload
and the client cannot influence it. This prevents a registrant from backdating a registration by
manipulating any client-side value. The on-chain clock is a consensus-level value, shared across
all validators, and is subject to the same safety properties as the rest of the block content.
Clock drift on Solana is a known phenomenon and bounded in practice to the order of minutes;
for integrity anchoring, this granularity is sufficient, but we note that snaproot timestamps are
not appropriate for use cases that require sub-second precision or strict legally-binding time
attestation.
5.8 Infrastructure Authenticity via the Relay Wallet
As noted in Section 4.4, every snaproot transaction carries two signatures: the user’s wallet as
the memo signer, and the snaproot relay wallet as the fee payer. The relay wallet’s public key is
fixed, known, and published by snaproot. This structure gives rise to a three-layer authenticity
model.
The first layer is structural : any party can construct a Solana memo transaction with the
same payload format as snaproot, invoking the same memo program. This layer provides no
snaproot-specific authenticity signal.
The second layer is infrastructural : a verifier who checks that the fee payer of a memo
transaction matches the published snaproot relay wallet address can confirm that the transaction
was submitted through the snaproot relay infrastructure. An adversary who wishes to fabricate
a record that passes this check must control the relay wallet’s private key — which, under the
assumption that the relay wallet is not compromised, they do not. This layer provides a verifiable
binding to the snaproot deployment, at the cost of introducing a dependency on the relay wallet’s
continued integrity.
The third layer is user-cryptographic: the user’s wallet signs the memo independently of
the relay wallet. This layer is unconditional: it does not depend on the relay wallet and is
established by the user’s own key material. It provides the non-repudiation and authorship
guarantees analyzed in Section 5.3.
The three layers are independent and compose naturally. A verifier seeking maximum as-
surance checks all three: that the memo payload carries a recognised version prefix (SR1 in the
current format), that the fee payer matches the known relay wallet, and that the memo signer
matches the claimed registrant wallet. A verifier who does not trust or cannot reach snaproot
infrastructure can still rely on the third layer alone, which is sufficient for the core integrity and
existence-proof guarantees.
The relay wallet is not part of the cryptographic trust root. The cryptographic trust
root of snaproot consists of three elements: the second-preimage resistance of SHA-256, the safety
of Solana consensus for confirmed blocks, and the user’s private key. The relay wallet is not among
17

them. It is an operational co-signer whose presence enables the infrastructure authenticity signal
of the second layer, but whose absence or compromise leaves the trust root intact. This is the
precise sense in which snaproot’s integrity guarantees are provider-independent: the provider
controls the relay wallet, but the provider does not control the trust root.
Relay wallet compromise: threat boundary. A compromise of the relay wallet’s private
key would allow an adversary to submit memo transactions that carry the relay wallet’s co-
signature and thus pass the infrastructure authenticity check of the second layer. This is a
serious operational security concern. However, its impact on the system’s core guarantees is
strictly bounded: a relay-wallet compromise does not affect file integrity (G1), because the in-
tegrity guarantee reduces to the second-preimage resistance of SHA-256, which is independent of
any wallet; it does not affect existence-proof persistence (G2), because a confirmed transaction’s
existence on the ledger is independent of which wallet paid for it; and it does not affect author-
ship (G3), because the user’s wallet signature on the memo is separate from the relay wallet’s
signature and cannot be forged without the user’s private key. The compromise affects only the
infrastructure authenticity signal : a verifier relying on the relay wallet co-signature as proof that
a transaction originated from snaproot’s infrastructure would be misled. Users who are aware of
a relay wallet compromise should revert to third-layer verification only. We note that if snaproot
rotates its relay wallet as a key management practice, a published registry of historical relay
wallet addresses is needed to support retrospective second-layer checks.
5.9 Priority of Registration
Because snaproot does not enforce protocol-level uniqueness on hashes (Section 5.6), multiple
parties may anchor the same hash independently. In contexts where priority matters — for
instance, establishing which party registered a file first — the relevant criterion is the block time
of the earliest confirmed memo transaction whose payload contains the hash in question.
A verifier wishing to establish priority scans all memo transactions on Solana whose payload
matches a given hash and identifies the one with the lowest block time. The result is a provable,
chain-resident priority claim: the earliest anchor for hash H establishes the earliest on-chain
existence of the corresponding file, under whichever wallet submitted that anchor.
This priority check is currently a manual operation requiring an RPC scan. A planned
feature (Section 7.2) will expose this query directly in the snaproot application, allowing a user
to confirm at anchoring time — or at any later point — whether their registration is the earliest
on-chain record for a given file. The completeness of the priority determination depends on the
completeness of the RPC node’s transaction index; gaps in indexing could in principle cause an
earlier anchor to be overlooked. Users for whom priority is legally or commercially significant
should therefore retain their transaction identifier as primary evidence and treat the priority scan
as a supporting, not conclusive, signal.
5.10 Scope Limitation
snaproot provides integrity guarantees only relative to the state of a file at the time of its
registration. A file that was manipulated or synthetically generated before registration will be
anchored by the hash of that already-altered content, and subsequent verifications will confirm
it as unchanged relative to that state. This limitation is inherent to any post-hoc anchoring
system. The capture-time anchoring workflow (Section 4.7) narrows but does not eliminate this
gap by shifting the relevant trust boundary to the capture pipeline; we discuss the implications
in Section 8.
18

6 Evaluation
We evaluate snaproot empirically along three dimensions: hashing performance as a function
of file size, end-to-end registration and verification latency, and per-operation cost on Solana.
All measurements reported in this section were taken directly against the current production
snaproot backend on Solana Devnet; we treat the empirical latency figures as Devnet-only and
leave a formal characterization on Solana Mainnet under realistic load to future work. Because
the Solana memo program executes deterministically and the per-signature base fee is identical
on Devnet and Mainnet, the cost figures in Table 4 are directly applicable to the Mainnet
deployment up to the SOL/USD reference price at the time of publication. The implications of
the Devnet/Mainnet distinction are discussed in Section 6.6.
6.1 Experimental Setup
Experiments were conducted on a workstation running Windows 11, equipped with an Intel
Core i5-13500H CPU (with SHA-NI hardware acceleration) and 16 GB of RAM. The snaproot
backend under test is the production PHP / Laravel backend (PHP 8.2.12, Laravel) backed by
MySQL: the same backend that serves the snaproot mobile application and web frontend in the
current deployment. The backend was started locally with the bundled development server (php
artisan serve) bound to 127.0.0.1:8000, and blockchain interactions were performed against
the Solana Devnet network using its public RPC endpoint.
All measurements reported in Sections 6.2 through 6.4 were produced by this PHP / Laravel
backend. The benchmark harness is a separate process that drives the backend exclusively
through its public HTTP API, exactly as the mobile client does in production, and reports
per-call wall-clock latencies measured at the harness.
File hashing experiments used SHA-256 as in the production client. Random files were
generated for five size categories: 1 KB, 1 MB, 10 MB, 100 MB, and 500 MB; for each category,
50 independent trials were performed. For end-to-end performance, 200 registration and 200
verification requests were issued. Registration transactions were submitted to Solana Devnet
and confirmed before being counted; the verification operations measured are backend-cached
verifications, discussed in Section 6.3. Throughput figures are derived from the measured mean
single-request latency.
6.2 Hashing Performance
Table 2 summarises SHA-256 hashing times per file size category. We report the sample mean,
standard deviation, minimum, maximum, and the half-width of the 95 % confidence interval for
the mean (CI
95
), computed as 1.96 · s/
√
n with s the sample standard deviation and n = 50.
Table 2: SHA-256 hashing performance on the snaproot PHP backend host (50 trials each). CI
95 
is the
half-width of the 95 % confidence interval for the mean.
File size Mean (ms) Std (ms) Min (ms) Max (ms) CI
95 
(ms)
1 KB 0.081 0.032 0.060 0.215 0.009
1 MB 1.041 0.195 0.940 1.869 0.054
10 MB 11.570 1.437 10.904 20.604 0.398
100 MB 118.405 8.764 109.516 157.871 2.430
500 MB 609.175 20.470 568.458 679.092 5.676
Hashing throughput is approximately linear in file size across the range tested, with the 1 MB
through 500 MB measurements falling on a near-perfect line and an effective throughput of ap-
proximately 0.8 GB/s. The confidence intervals are narrow relative to the means, indicating that
hashing is a well-behaved deterministic process with little variability beyond memory subsystem
19

effects; the SHA-NI instruction set extension on the test CPU keeps the hashing cost below
130 ms for any file under 100 MB. For all file sizes under 100 MB, hashing completes within a
small fraction of the Solana confirmation latency reported in the next section, confirming that
hashing is not the bottleneck in the end-to-end registration latency budget for typical document
and image files.
6.3 Transaction Latency and Throughput
Table 3 summarises end-to-end performance for registration and verification, measured on the
PHP / Laravel backend over 200 trials. The interpretation of these two operations requires care.
Table 3: End-to-end performance of the snaproot PHP / Laravel backend on Solana Devnet (200 trials
each). CI
95 
is the half-width of the 95 % confidence interval for the mean. Verification figures reflect
backend-cached verification; see discussion below.
Metric Registration Verification
Mean latency (ms) 3,145.632 351.479
Std (ms) 924.987 93.797
CI
95 
on mean (ms) 128.181 13.000
P95 latency (ms) 4,659.069 442.763
P99 latency (ms) 5,803.387 457.840
Max observed (ms) 6,040.142 475.025
Sustained throughput (ops/min) 19.072 170.706
Registration latency is dominated by Solana transaction confirmation: the backend constructs
and signs the memo transaction in well under one hundred milliseconds, but must then wait for
the transaction to be included in a block and for that block to reach the confirmed commitment
depth. The measured mean of 3.15 s with a P99 of 5.80 s is consistent with the published
Solana confirmation profile, plus a modest additional overhead attributable to the PHP / Laravel
request-handling stack and the synchronous database write that records the resulting hash-log
entry before responding to the client. This figure is the relevant one for use cases that rely on
synchronous confirmation, including the capture-time anchoring workflow (Section 4.7). The
standard deviation of 0.92 s and the gap between the P95 (4.66 s) and the mean reflect natural
variability in Solana slot scheduling rather than backend-side jitter, as evidenced by the long tail
being almost entirely due to slot-confirmation outliers.
Verification mode. The reported verification rate of approximately 171 operations per minute
reflects backend-cached verification: when the snaproot backend has previously indexed a reg-
istration, a subsequent verification request is served by comparing the locally recomputed hash
against the indexed record without any round-trip to the Solana network. This figure charac-
terises the backend’s PHP request-handling, database, and HTTP layer rather than the through-
put of on-chain reads. The mean latency of 351 ms is dominated by the PHP / Laravel request
lifecycle and by the two MySQL writes that the verification path performs (the verification log
entry and the audit log entry); it is therefore an upper bound on what a more lightly instrumented
verifier would observe.
Direct on-chain verification — the protocol described in Algorithm 2 — requires an RPC
query per verification and is bounded by RPC rate limits and network round-trip time. Public
Solana RPC endpoints typically rate-limit at the order of 10
2 
requests per second; with the
latency of an RPC call dominated by network round-trip, sustained verification throughput from
a single client against a public endpoint is on the order of 10
1 
to 10
2 
verifications per second per
client.
1 
For the user-facing verification scenarios that motivate snaproot — a journalist checking
1
Higher rates are straightforwardly attainable through self-hosted RPC nodes or contracts with commercial
RPC providers, but these increase operational dependencies.
20

a photograph, an auditor sampling a logfile, a court verifying a piece of evidence — the relevant
figure is single-request latency rather than aggregate throughput, and direct on-chain verification
is comfortably within acceptable bounds.
This distinction is important for the trust architecture: the provider-independent verification
path (G5, Section 3.2) is always available, but the high-throughput verification figure reported
in Table 3 is specifically an operational property of the snaproot backend, not of the system’s
trust guarantees.
6.4 Cost Analysis
The cost structure of a snaproot registration consists of the Solana transaction fee paid per
memo transaction. Because snaproot uses the memo program rather than dedicated on-chain
accounts, there is no rent-exempt deposit per record: the memo transaction is included in the
ledger and persists with it, without requiring a long-lived account to be funded. Each registration
transaction carries two ed25519 signatures: one by the snaproot relay wallet (the fee payer) and
one by the user’s wallet (the registrant). The full per-registration cost is therefore the network
fee for one two-signature transaction, paid by the snaproot relay wallet on behalf of the user.
Table 4 reports values measured from a representative Devnet memo transaction produced
by the PHP backend during the latency benchmark of Section 6.3. The compute-units figure is
reported by the Solana runtime; the per-signature base fee is fixed at 5,000 lamports by Solana
and is identical on Devnet and Mainnet. The USD figures use a SOL reference price of $82.45
(CoinGecko spot, 2026-05-30); they scale linearly with that price.
Table 4: Transaction cost components for a snaproot memo registration on Solana, measured on Devnet
against the PHP backend. There is no rent-exempt component, since the memo program does not create
a persistent account per record.
Cost factor Value
Memo payload size 219 bytes
Compute units consumed 92,246
Signatures per transaction 2 (relay + user)
Base transaction fee (per signature) 5,000 lamports = 0.000005 SOL
Priority fee (current deployment) 0
Total fee per registration 10,000 lamports = 0.000010 SOL
Approximate USD equivalent (SOL @ $82.45) $0.000825
1,000 registrations (total fee, USD) $0.8245
1,000,000 registrations (total fee, USD) $824.50
Sample Devnet tx signature 31Eg1ARz...ri9cWQ
2
The relay-wallet model makes the cost analysis straightforward for both the user and the
operator. The user incurs no SOL cost at all, since they do not pay the fee directly. The
operator’s aggregate cost scales linearly with the number of registrations, dominated entirely by
the per-transaction fee. There is no separate storage or account-rent component that scales with
the number of records, in contrast to designs that allocate one Solana account per registration.
For high-volume deployments, this cost structure is well-suited to amortisation through
Merkle aggregation (Section 7): a single memo transaction whose payload is a Merkle root
commits to many file hashes at once, reducing the aggregate fee paid by the relay wallet by the
corresponding factor.
6.5 Comparison to Related Systems
We compare snaproot to the most widely deployed free hash-anchoring service, OpenTimestamps
(OTS), along two axes: a quantitative head-to-head comparison of submission latency, proof
21

artifact size, and infrastructure availability, measured on the same workstation against the live
public calendar servers (Section 6.5.1); and a qualitative use-case suitability matrix that also
incorporates OriginStamp and Chainpoint, for which we did not perform an end-to-end re-
measurement (Section 6.5.2). OriginStamp and Chainpoint are kept qualitative because the
former is rate-limited on its free tier and the latter no longer maintains a stable public-hosted
anchoring endpoint; in both cases a fair quantitative comparison would require operating a paid
or self-hosted instance, which we leave to future work.
6.5.1 Quantitative Comparison: snaproot vs. OpenTimestamps
We implemented a benchmark client that mirrors the synchronous portion of the OpenTimes-
tamps stamping protocol: for each of N = 50 randomly generated SHA-256 digests, the client
issues an HTTP POST to each of the three official public calendar servers (alice, bob, finney)
and waits for the serialised provisional timestamp tree. The calendars are queried in parallel on
independent threads, mirroring the behaviour of the reference otsclient. We report two latency
modes:
• Quorum 2-of-3 : time until the second-fastest calendar has responded. This is the latency
that an otsclient using the default m = 2 quorum experiences before it considers the
proof complete.
• Fastest single calendar : time until the first calendar responds. This is the latency of
an otsclient configured to use a single calendar (lower latency, no redundancy against
calendar failure).
We also attempted to measure a third mode in which the client waits for all three calendars
to respond, but were unable to do so: one of the three official calendars (finney.calendar.
eternitywall.com) was unreachable for all 50 of our requests, so no trial completed the full
three-of-three rendezvous. We treat that observation itself as a measurement, reported in the
Availability row of Table 5.
Table 5 compares snaproot’s end-to-end registration latency (from Table 3) to the OTS
submission latency measured on the same workstation, plus proof-artifact and availability figures.
Both systems were exercised over commodity public Internet from the same workstation; snaproot
used Solana Devnet via the public RPC endpoint and OTS used the official public calendar
servers.
Three observations follow from Table 5. First, the submission-latency means are in the same
order of magnitude (3,146 ms for snaproot vs. 2,652 ms for OTS in quorum mode), with snaproot
approximately 19 % higher at the mean. This is not a like-for-like comparison: snaproot’s 3.15 s
is the time to a Solana-confirmed memo transaction, returned by a PHP / Laravel backend that
additionally performs a synchronous MySQL write of the hash-log record before responding to
the client; OTS’s 2.65 s is the time to a provisional timestamp tree returned by a calendar server,
which is not anchored to any blockchain until the next Bitcoin block contains the calendar’s
aggregated commitment, approximately ten minutes later in expectation and approximately one
hour later if a six-block confirmation policy is required (the Anchor-immutability row of Table 5).
The two systems therefore deliver different artefacts at the moment they return; the comparable
latency suggests that snaproot’s stronger guarantee comes at no meaningful end-to-end cost.
Second, snaproot has substantially tighter tail latency. The P99 of snaproot registration
is 5.80 s, against 8.65 s for OTS in both modes. We attribute this to the structural difference
between Solana’s slot-driven confirmation (a confirmed slot arrives every 400 ms in steady state)
and the OTS calendar pipeline (an HTTP request whose response time is a function of calendar-
server load and Internet round-trip variability).
Third, and most concretely, the failure of one of the three official OpenTimestamps calendars
to respond to any of our 50 requests is an empirical instance of the calendar-availability as-
sumption becoming a calendar-availability dependency. A 2-of-3 quorum policy tolerates exactly
22

Table 5: Head-to-head quantitative comparison of snaproot and OpenTimestamps (snaproot N = 200
against the PHP backend, OTS N = 50 against the public calendars, same workstation, commodity public
Internet). Submission latency is wall-clock time from holding a SHA-256 digest to holding a usable proof
artifact. Anchor-immutability latency is the additional delay before the proof commits to a confirmed
block on the underlying chain.
Metric snaproot OTS (quorum 2-of-3) OTS (fastest single)
Submission la-
tency, mean (ms)
3,146 2,652 2,178
Submission la-
tency, P95 (ms)
4,659 4,244 3,740
Submission la-
tency, P99 (ms)
5,803 8,653 8,608
Submission la-
tency, max ob-
served (ms)
6,040 8,653 8,608
95 % CI half-width
on the mean (ms)
128 301 301
Qualitative properties at the system boundary
Anchor-
immutability
0 (on-chain at return) ∼10 min (→∼60 min) same
Proof artifact size tx-sig + 32 B hash 351 B mean (272–517 B) 169 B mean
Direct user cost $0 (relay: $0.000825) $0 (calendar absorbs fee) $0
Availability over
benchmark run
Devnet RPC: 100 % alice+bob: 100 %; finney: 0 % n/a
Trust model Solana validators Calendar(s) + Bitcoin Single cal. + Bitcoin
Capture-time an-
choring
Yes (final at return) No (provisional) No
23

this failure mode and the user is unaffected at submission time; a strict 3-of-3 policy would fail
outright. snaproot has no analogous third-party aggregator: the Solana validator set was at full
availability over the same window.
We did not measure verification latency for OpenTimestamps because verifying an OTS proof
requires the proof to have been upgraded with a Bitcoin Merkle path, which in turn requires the
calendar’s next aggregated commitment to be confirmed in a Bitcoin block. The dominant cost
of verification is therefore the round-trip to a Bitcoin RPC node or block-explorer API, which
is a function of the chosen verifier rather than of the OTS protocol itself; the snaproot direct-
on-chain verification path described in Algorithm 2 has the analogous property and inherits the
latency of the chosen Solana RPC endpoint.
6.5.2 Qualitative Use-Case Suitability
Table 6 generalises the comparison to the systems for which we did not perform an end-to-end
re-measurement. The matrix scores each system on its fitness for a set of use cases that differ
primarily in their latency tolerance and trust requirements.
Table 6: Qualitative use-case suitability of hash-anchoring systems. ✓ indicates a good fit, ◦ a workable
but suboptimal fit, and – a structural mismatch.
Use case (latency toler-
ance)
OTS OriginStamp Chainpoint IPFS/Filecoin snaproot
Long-term archival anchor-
ing (hours)
✓ ✓ ✓ ◦ ✓
Compliance audit-trail an-
choring (minutes)
◦ ◦ ◦ – ✓
Interactive document an-
choring (seconds)
– – – – ✓
Capture-time photo anchor-
ing (synchronous)
– – – – ✓
Content delivery with in-
tegrity (variable)
– – – ✓ –
The matrix reflects the latency characteristics of each substrate and its architectural role.
OpenTimestamps and Chainpoint inherit Bitcoin’s confirmation window (approximately one
hour) and are therefore strong choices for archival use cases where latency is not a constraint,
but they cannot synchronously support interactive or capture-time workflows. OriginStamp’s
centralised aggregation introduces additional latency on top of Bitcoin’s confirmation time. IPF-
S/Filecoin is the only system in the comparison that combines content storage with content-
addressed retrieval, but it does not provide an authoritative integrity claim independent of pin-
ning. snaproot’s structural advantage is concentrated in the lower-latency use cases, where
Bitcoin-based substrates are not viable.
6.6 Devnet vs. Mainnet
The hashing and latency figures reported in Sections 6.2 and 6.3 were obtained on Solana Devnet
against the production PHP / Laravel backend. The cost figures reported in Section 6.4 were
measured on Devnet but are directly applicable to Mainnet: the Solana memo program executes
deterministically, and the per-signature base fee is fixed at 5,000 lamports on both networks.
The only Mainnet-specific cost variable is the optional priority fee, which is set to zero in the
current snaproot deployment. Should the deployment configure a non-zero priority fee in the
future — for example, to improve confirmation latency during periods of Mainnet congestion —
the corresponding line of Table 4 should be updated accordingly.
24

The production deployment of snaproot operates on Solana Mainnet. A representative Main-
net registration record, generated by the snaproot mobile application during the preparation of
this manuscript, carries the following values (as displayed in the snaproot certificate format and
independently verifiable on the Solana Explorer):
• Transaction signature: 3H8yzxebxUaZWRYGRzc9QyB1hhThJetLqfeCQuoYTqGLvY8nTijq4
9sEjNB5SfjsUNWdCq1smLcMJWbbKGEbWyMR
3
• Slot: 423,337,332
• Timestamp: 2026-05-31T10:23:55 (Solana Mainnet block time)
• Confirmation status: FINALIZED, confirmations: MAX
• SHA-256 hash: 31f0bb4c07d6068ffc4288a2496812b9c9968f130004df23f8d4c0cd7b79
4629
• Registrant wallet: 3K6xgyyRVowFhJW9kzWzjVhNWnzQ2kBTADetmo2yvacc
• Capture source: Kamera (Live-Aufnahme) [camera, live capture — as displayed in the
application]
• Fee paid: 0.000010 SOL (consistent with Table 4)
This record confirms that the cost figures in Table 4 are directly applicable to the Main-
net deployment: the observed fee of 0.000010 SOL matches the Devnet measurement exactly,
as expected from the deterministic fee schedule of the Solana memo program. The record also
demonstrates the full certificate format described in Section 4.4, including the transaction sig-
nature, registrant wallet, SHA-256 hash, block timestamp, and capture metadata.
Devnet and Mainnet share the same protocol but differ in validator set and load profile.
Mainnet performance may differ from the latency figures reported here, particularly during pe-
riods of congestion. Solana Mainnet has experienced several extended outages between 2022
and 2024; these affect liveness for new anchorings during the outage period but do not retroac-
tively invalidate previously confirmed records, in accordance with the safety/liveness distinction
made in Section 3.3. A formal characterisation of snaproot’s Mainnet latency and throughput
performance under realistic load is left to future work.
A further evaluation dimension is left to a later revision. The measurements reported here
were obtained on a workstation, whereas the production target for snaproot is a mobile device.
A future version of this paper aimed at a conference venue will report measurements taken on
the actual mobile deployment target: SHA-256 hashing throughput on a current mid-range iOS
and Android device, and end-to-end registration latency from the snaproot mobile application
on Solana Mainnet. These mobile-hardware measurements would strengthen the empirical char-
acterisation of the system as deployed and are planned for that revision.
3
Independently verifiable at https://explorer.solana.com/tx/3H8yzxebxUaZWRYGRzc9QyB1hhThJetLqfeCQ
uoYTqGLvY8nTijq49sEjNB5SfjsUNWdCq1smLcMJWbbKGEbWyMR.
25

7 Limitations, Roadmap, and Outlook
We structure this discussion in three tiers reflecting different levels of development maturity.
Section 7.1 describes known limitations of the current system that we explicitly acknowledge
rather than claim to have solved. Section 7.2 lists features that are under active development
and are expected to appear in upcoming versions. Section 7.4 describes longer-term concepts
that are deliberately not on the near-term development path but for which a coherent design has
been worked out, so that the system can be extended in those directions if and when a concrete
need arises.
Deployed 
Next release Mid-term 
Long-term
Wallet
& Keys
Anchoring
Verification
Trust
& Protocols
AI
& Prove-
nance
Local wallet
Relay wallet
Wallet import
Multi-device
Capture-time
GPS screen
Optional salt
Sel. metadata
Merkle aggregation
snaproot API
Via TX sig.
Relay auth
Wallet history
“Am I first?”
Four-tier arch.
Cross-fork verif.
BSCP 
Cross-chain migr.
Substrate indep.
C2PA reference AI fake detection 
AI-aug. provenance
Deployed 
Next release Mid-term 
Long-term
Figure 2: Development timeline of snaproot: deployed features (v0.9.9), near-term roadmap, medium-
term, and long-term outlook items, organised by thematic track.
7.1 Limitations
Registration of pre-modified content. snaproot detects changes relative to the registered
hash. A manipulated or synthetically generated file that is registered at the outset will be
anchored by the hash of that already-altered content, and all subsequent verifications will return
TRUE for that state. This is an inherent limitation of any post-hoc anchoring system. The
capture-time anchoring workflow (Section 4.7) narrows this gap to the duration of the capture
pipeline itself, but does not eliminate the residual trust assumption on the integrity of the capture
device and application.
Timestamp frontrunning of registration transactions. As discussed in Section 3.1, an
adversary who learns of a pending registration — or who otherwise possesses the file — may
anchor the same hash under their own wallet first, manufacturing an earlier on-chain existence
claim that competes with the legitimate one. Snaproot does not enforce protocol-level uniqueness
on hashes (Section 4.4), so this does not displace the legitimate user’s later anchor, but it does
create an earlier competing record under the adversary’s identity. In practice, the attack requires
the adversary to learn the file before registration is confirmed; for files generated locally on the
26

user’s device and immediately registered (as in capture-time anchoring), the attack window
is essentially nonexistent. For workflows that involve sharing or transmitting the file before
registration, the user should register before sharing. The planned salt mechanism (Section 7.2)
further mitigates the attack by making the anchor depend on a user-controlled value not derivable
from the file alone.
Key management trade-off. The current snaproot installation generates and stores the pri-
vate key locally on the user’s device (Section 4.2). The key can be exported and imported
into other Solana wallet providers, so the user retains an out-of-snaproot path to recover their
identity. Importing an exported key into a second snaproot installation, which would enable
multi-device use under a single snaproot identity, is scheduled for the next release. Until that
mechanism is in place, a user who loses their device without having exported the key beforehand
cannot continue to anchor new records under the same identity; existing records remain verifiable
through existence-proof persistence (G2), but new anchorings under the same wallet require the
original key.
No on-chain Merkle aggregation in the current implementation. snaproot currently
anchors one hash per memo transaction. This yields a simple architecture and a predictable
per-file cost, but does not amortize the per-transaction fee or the on-chain footprint across many
files. For high-volume use cases such as continuous log anchoring or bulk archival workflows,
aggregating many file hashes into a single memo transaction via a Merkle tree reduces both the
aggregate fee paid by the relay wallet and the on-chain memo volume. Aggregation through
Merkle trees is straightforward in principle and is planned for a future release.
Hash function dependency. The security of snaproot binds to the second-preimage (and,
in the malicious-registrant case, collision) resistance of SHA-256. Both properties are well-
established under classical computational assumptions [17]. Quantum adversaries are relevant in
two forms. Grover’s algorithm provides a quadratic speed-up for preimage and second-preimage
search, reducing the effective security of a 256-bit hash from 256 to 128 bits, which remains
computationally infeasible. The Brassard–Høyer–Tapp quantum collision-finding algorithm [19]
reduces collision security from the classical birthday bound of ∼128 bits to approximately 85
bits, which is theoretically weaker but still large. A migration path to alternative hash functions
such as SHA-3 or BLAKE3 should be considered for long-horizon deployments; those functions
are subject to analogous quantum bounds.
Reliance on a single blockchain substrate. Long-term verification of existing records cur-
rently relies on the continued availability of Solana archives. While archive nodes and block
explorers are operated by multiple independent parties, the diversity of these operators is lower
than in the Bitcoin ecosystem, where full-node archives are widely held. In the current imple-
mentation, users seeking the strongest long-term verifiability guarantee should treat external
archival of their registration certificates as the primary defense in depth. The cross-chain migra-
tion concept in Section 7.4 is a prospective extension path that may, if realized, further reduce
this dependency; it is not a present mitigation.
Metadata is not cryptographically bound to the file. The metadata carried in the memo
payload (Section 4.4) is stored in cleartext on-chain and is not included in the SHA-256 input.
As on-chain data, the metadata is itself immutable once confirmed; however, because it does not
enter the hash computation, it is not cryptographically bound to the file content. In particular,
the integrity guarantee (G1) certifies that the file is unchanged, but says nothing about whether
the associated filename, capture source, or geolocation accurately describe that file: a registrant
could have recorded misleading metadata at registration time. Two consequences follow. First,
27

applications that require metadata to be tamper-evident together with the file should, in the
current implementation, embed that information in the file itself (for example in the image’s
EXIF data) before registration, so that it is covered by the file hash. Second, because the
metadata is public on the ledger, users should not place sensitive information in this field.
A related privacy consideration concerns personal data. The file hash itself carries no personal
information and is not reversible to the file, so it raises no data-protection concern on its own.
The cleartext metadata, however, can: in the current implementation, the pre-submission screen
displays the GPS availability status before anchoring, and GPS coordinates are included in
the metadata only if location access has been granted and GPS is available at capture time;
if GPS is unavailable or the user has denied location access, the record is anchored without
geolocation metadata. Where GPS coordinates are present, a sequence of such records under a
single persistent wallet can constitute a location-and-time profile that, combined with external
knowledge, may be personally identifiable. Because on-chain data is immutable, such information
cannot subsequently be erased, which stands in tension with data-protection regimes that provide
for a right to erasure. Users who are concerned about location privacy should therefore deny
location access to the application. The planned per-use-case metadata control (Section 7.2) will
provide additional control: it will allow metadata to be omitted entirely or to be included in the
hash input, the latter removing it from the public cleartext region while binding it to the file.
A further distinction concerns where metadata resides. snaproot controls the on-chain meta-
data field directly, and the planned per-use-case control applies to it. Metadata embedded in
the file itself, such as EXIF GPS tags, is a separate matter: since the file hash covers the entire
file, any such embedded metadata is implicitly anchored within the file hash regardless of the
on-chain metadata setting. For images captured through snaproot’s own camera function, the
application can control whether such metadata is written into the file at all; for files that are
imported and snaprooted after the fact, any pre-existing embedded metadata is already part of
the file and cannot be removed without altering it, and hence its hash. Users should therefore
be aware that choosing not to store on-chain metadata does not by itself guarantee that no
metadata is anchored, since metadata may already reside in the file.
7.2 Roadmap
The following features are under active development.
Wallet import and recovery. Wallet export is implemented: the user can already extract the
private key from a snaproot installation and import it into any standard Solana wallet provider.
Importing an exported key back into another snaproot installation, which would enable multi-
device use under a single snaproot identity and full in-app recovery from device loss, is scheduled
for the next release.
Verification via wallet history. The verification protocol (Algorithm 2) currently requires
the transaction signature as input. A planned extension will additionally support verification
when only the file and the user’s wallet public key are known: the verifier scans the wallet’s
memo transactions on Solana and returns the earliest one whose anchored hash matches the file.
This is useful for verifying records whose transaction signature has not been retained alongside
the file.
Priority query: “Am I first?” As discussed in Section 5.9, the earliest confirmed memo
transaction for a given hash constitutes the on-chain priority record for that file. A planned in-
app feature will expose this query directly: at anchoring time, and on demand during verification,
the application will scan all indexed memo transactions on Solana for the anchored hash and
report whether the user’s registration is the earliest. This allows users to establish, and to
28

demonstrate to third parties, that no earlier on-chain existence claim exists for the same content
under any wallet. The query result will be accompanied by a caveat reflecting the completeness
assumptions discussed in Section 5.9.
Optional user-controlled salt. The hashing module will support an optional salt parameter,
allowing the user to compute H
anchor 
= SHA256(F ∥ s) for a user-chosen value s. This serves
two purposes simultaneously. First, it permits two independent parties to anchor the same file
with different salts, yielding different on-chain records without conflict. Second, it mitigates
frontrunning: an adversary who observes a pending registration transaction does not know the
salt and therefore cannot trivially construct a competing registration. The exact construction
of the salt — a user-chosen value, a value derived from the wallet public key, or a hybrid — is
subject to ongoing design analysis with particular attention to recoverability (the user should
not need to separately store the salt to verify later), frontrunning resilience, and compatibility
with the outlook features described below.
Merkle aggregation for batch registration. An aggregated registration mode will allow
a single memo transaction to anchor an arbitrary number of file hashes through their Merkle
root. This amortizes the per-transaction fee paid by the relay wallet across many records and
reduces the aggregate on-chain memo volume; it is the natural mechanism for high-volume use
cases such as continuous log anchoring or bulk archival workflows. The verification protocol
is correspondingly extended: the verifier presents the file, the transaction identifier, and the
Merkle proof for the file’s hash within the aggregated tree. This feature requires non-trivial
changes to the registration and verification workflow and is therefore positioned as a medium-
term rather than near-term item; it is listed here because the protocol design is complete, but
its implementation is expected after the near-term roadmap items above.
snaproot API. The snaproot registration and verification functionality is currently accessible
through the mobile application and a web frontend. A planned extension will expose these
operations as a documented HTTP API, allowing third-party applications to integrate snaproot
as an integrity service without implementing their own Solana interaction layer. The API will
provide at minimum two endpoints: a registration endpoint that accepts a file hash and metadata
and returns a transaction identifier, and a verification endpoint that accepts a file hash and
transaction identifier and returns a deterministic integrity result. The trust properties of the
underlying system are unchanged by this interface layer: each registration is still signed by
the calling application’s wallet under the user’s key material, and the provider-independence
guarantee (G5) remains intact because verification can always be performed directly against
any Solana RPC endpoint. The API targets use cases in which snaproot’s integrity anchoring is
embedded as a building block in document management systems, content pipelines, or compliance
platforms.
Selectable metadata binding. As described in Section 4.4, metadata is currently stored in
cleartext on-chain and is not part of the hash input. A first level of metadata control is already
implemented: the pre-submission screen (Section 4.7) displays the GPS availability status before
anchoring, and GPS coordinates are included only when location access has been granted and
GPS is available; the system gracefully degrades to anchoring without geolocation metadata
otherwise. A planned extension will let the user choose, on a per-use-case basis, among three
modes: attaching no metadata at all; storing metadata in cleartext as today; or using the
cryptographic commitment scheme described in the following subsection. The choice is a trade-
off among on-chain legibility, cryptographic binding, and confidentiality, and is best made per
application rather than fixed globally.
29

7.3 Cryptographic Metadata Commitments
The absence of a cryptographic binding between on-chain metadata and file content is the single
most significant architectural limitation of the current system for compliance, forensics, and legal
applications. A metadata field that is immutable on-chain but not bound to the file it describes
can be set to any value at registration time; a verifier can confirm that the metadata has not
changed since registration, but cannot confirm that it accurately described the file at registration
time. This section sets out the planned construction that addresses this limitation.
Proposed commitment scheme. The planned metadata commitment scheme separates file
integrity from metadata integrity while binding both to the same on-chain anchor:
H
file 
= SHA256(File)
H
meta 
= SHA256(Metadata ∥ s)
H
anchor 
= SHA256(H
file 
∥ H
meta
)
where s is a user-held salt. Only H
anchor 
is stored on-chain; neither Metadata nor s appear
in the ledger. This construction achieves three goals simultaneously. First, the file can be
verified independently: a verifier who holds the file computes H
file 
and checks it against the
component committed in H
anchor
. Second, the metadata is cryptographically bound to the
file: any modification of either the file or its metadata produces a different H
anchor
, which is
detectable. Third, the salt s prevents brute-force recovery of low-entropy metadata — such as
GPS coordinates or filenames — by an adversary who observes the on-chain anchor.
Selective disclosure. A notable property of the scheme is selective disclosure: the registrant
can prove the file unaltered without revealing the metadata, by presenting H
file 
and the commit-
ment path without disclosing Metadata or s. Conversely, the registrant can prove both file and
metadata integrity to an auditor by presenting all inputs. This property is directly relevant to
compliance use cases where the existence proof must be demonstrable to an external regulator
without disclosing sensitive operational metadata.
Relationship to the current system. In the current implementation, H
anchor 
= H
file 
=
SHA256(File) and metadata is stored in cleartext. The commitment scheme generalises this: a
system that stores H
anchor 
on-chain is backward-compatible in the sense that a file-only verifier
can still extract and verify H
file 
from the commitment, as long as the commitment path is
retained alongside the anchor. The transition from the current design to the commitment scheme
is therefore a client-side change with no on-chain protocol modification required.
7.4 Outlook
The following concepts are not on the near-term or medium-term development path. We describe
them because we expect questions about long-term persistence, multi-party protocols, and sub-
strate independence to arise as the system matures, and because articulating a coherent design
now ensures that the system can be extended in those directions without architectural surprises.
Cross-chain migration (3a–3c) is positioned as a long-term safety net that becomes relevant only
when the lifetime of the current substrate comes into question. The Bilateral snaproot Commit-
ment Protocol (BSCP) and the AI-augmented provenance direction are medium-to-long-term
items whose realization depends on application-layer workflow development beyond the core
anchoring mechanism.
30

Cross-chain trust migration: anchoring older chain generations within newer ones
(3a). As blockchains evolve, the particular chain on which snaproot operates today may be
superseded by a newer protocol version. A provider — which may be snaproot itself, or any
other party with sufficient archival capacity — can produce a verifiable snapshot of the relevant
chain history, compute a canonical hash over this snapshot, and anchor that hash within the
newer chain using the same snaproot mechanism. A verifier in the future can then prove the
integrity of any record on the older chain by (a) producing the record from an archive, (b)
showing that the archive snapshot hashes to the value anchored in the newer chain, and (c)
verifying the newer-chain anchor. Diversity among independent snapshot providers provides
additional robustness: if multiple parties independently publish snapshot hashes and they agree,
manipulation is detectable.
Cross-chain hash migration: user-initiated, wallet-bound (3b). A user can elect to
migrate all snaproots created under their wallet W to a different blockchain — for example,
from Solana to Ethereum. This migration is performed as a single aggregated transaction on the
target chain. The migration record contains the source-wallet pubkey, the migration timestamp,
and a commitment to the set of migrated records (for example, their Merkle root). The exact
data structure of the commitment is a design question that we leave open here: a pure Merkle
root minimizes on-chain footprint but requires the user to hold the proof set externally; an
explicit hash list is self-contained but larger; a Merkle root combined with a locally retained
proof set combines the efficiency of the former with the verifiability of the latter. We anticipate
the third variant to be the most natural fit for snaproot’s user-sovereignty property, since it
places the proof material in the user’s own keeping. Migration is purely user-initiated: no party
other than the holder of the source wallet’s private key can migrate records, which preserves the
user-sovereignty property of the trust architecture across the chain boundary.
Substrate independence of snaproot as a whole (3c). Mechanism 3b above is the foun-
dation on which snaproot itself can be ported to a different blockchain substrate in the future,
while preserving the verifiability of records created on the current substrate. The choice of
Solana today is an operational decision optimized for the latency and cost profile of the current
chain ecosystem; it is not an architectural commitment. A future snaproot client on a different
chain would (i) anchor new records natively on the new chain, (ii) recognize migrated records
via their cross-chain migration commitments, and (iii) optionally provide a fallback verification
path against archives of the old chain. The design space for the user-facing presentation of pre-
migration records in a post-migration client (sorting, search, display of provenance across chains)
is part of this outlook but does not affect the underlying cryptographic guarantees.
Bilateral snaproot Commitment Protocol (BSCP) for multi-party document anchor-
ing (4). A recurring scenario in legal, commercial, and regulatory contexts is that two parties
wish to jointly anchor a shared document — for example, a contract — such that neither can
later claim a different version was the agreed original. The naive approach of each party inde-
pendently anchoring the document is insufficient, because it admits a manipulation attack: one
party could anchor a subtly modified version of the document before the other party anchors
the agreed version, thereby manufacturing an earlier on-chain existence claim for the altered
content. This is a content-level frontrunning attack, distinct from the transaction-level frontrun-
ning discussed in Section 3.1, because it does not require knowledge of the other party’s pending
transaction — it requires only that the attacker anchor first.
The Bilateral snaproot Commitment Protocol (BSCP) addresses this by requiring both par-
ties to produce on-chain evidence of agreement to the same hash. We describe two variants of
increasing strength.
31

In the loosely coupled variant, both parties independently anchor the same hash H = SHA256(D)
of the agreed document D under their respective wallets, within a defined time window. A ver-
ifier confirms that (i) both anchors carry the same hash, and (ii) both block times fall within
the agreed window. This provides mutual attestation without sequential dependency: neither
party needs to wait for the other’s transaction to be confirmed before submitting their own. The
limitation is that it does not prove that each party had seen the other’s anchor at the time of
submission; a party could in principle anchor a different version of the document under a different
transaction and later claim their intended anchor was the loosely coupled one.
In the tightly coupled variant, the second party’s anchor payload includes the transaction
signature of the first party’s confirmed anchor. This creates a cryptographic chain: the second
anchor provably post-dates the first and explicitly acknowledges it. A verifier can confirm that
(i) Party A anchored H at time t
A
, (ii) Party B anchored H at time t
B 
> t
A
, and (iii) Party B’s
anchor payload references Party A’s transaction signature, proving that Party B was aware of
Party A’s anchor. The tight coupling eliminates the ambiguity of the loosely coupled variant
but requires sequential submission: Party B must wait for Party A’s transaction to be confirmed
before constructing their own anchor payload.
Both variants rely on snaproot’s existing wallet infrastructure: each party submits their
anchor using their own snaproot user wallet, signed locally, with the relay wallet as fee payer.
No protocol extension is required beyond the ability to include a reference transaction signature in
the memo payload, which the current payload structure already accommodates. The application-
level workflow — including the time window agreement, the handshake between wallets, and the
presentation of the bilateral proof — is the subject of ongoing design work. The BSCP is
positioned as a medium-term outlook item: the cryptographic primitives are already present in
the deployed system, but the application-level coordination protocol requires dedicated design
and implementation effort that goes beyond the near-term roadmap. A key open question is
the handling of the non-participation case: if one party anchors and the other does not, the
single-party anchor remains valid as a unilateral existence proof but does not constitute a BSCP
commitment; the protocol should make this distinction explicit to users.
Identity anchoring pattern as a user workflow. A user concerned about long-term prov-
ability of authorship — not only existence — can anchor an identity-attesting image as one of
the first records under their wallet (for example, a photograph of themselves holding an iden-
tity document). Should the user later lose their private key, the existence-proof persistence
(G2) ensures that the identity-attesting record itself remains verifiable; the user can then re-
establish the authorship link by physical means (in-person identity verification, or automated
face-against-document comparison [20]) combined with the chain-resident record. This pattern
does not require any extension of the snaproot system; it relies entirely on existing functionality
and on the structural separation between existence and authorship proofs discussed in Section 5.
It is documented here as a recommended user practice, not as a planned feature.
AI-augmented integrity and provenance verification (5). The integrity guarantees that
snaproot provides are deterministic and binary: a file either matches its registered hash or it
does not. This is complementary to, but structurally distinct from, the probabilistic judgements
that AI-based content analysis produces — for example, whether an image appears to have been
synthetically generated or manipulated. A longer-term direction for the snaproot ecosystem is
to use the chain-resident existence record as a trusted anchor point for downstream AI-based
provenance workflows.
The envisioned integration works as follows. A file that has been registered via capture-
time anchoring carries an immutable on-chain record of its state at the moment of capture.
Any AI model subsequently applied to that file — for fake detection, deepfake identification,
or content authenticity classification — can be given the guarantee that the file it is analysing
32

is cryptographically identical to the registered original: the hash comparison of Algorithm 2
establishes this before the AI model is invoked. This eliminates a class of attacks in which an
adversary substitutes a manipulated version of the file between registration and AI analysis,
causing the model to render a verdict on the wrong input.
Conversely, the AI model’s output can itself be anchored as a snaproot record, binding the
model’s verdict to the specific file version and to the specific model version that produced it. This
creates a verifiable provenance chain: the original file, its integrity proof, and the AI-generated
analysis are all chain-resident and mutually linked, allowing any later party to reconstruct the
full provenance of the authenticity claim.
This direction is structured in two layers with different time horizons. The first layer — using
snaproot’s chain-resident existence record as a trusted input anchor for AI-based fake detection
— is a medium-term direction: it does not require changes to the snaproot core and depends
primarily on the availability of suitable AI models and integration interfaces. The second layer —
anchoring the AI model’s verdict itself as a snaproot record to create a full provenance chain — is
a longer-term direction that depends on the maturation of standardised AI provenance interfaces,
an active area of development in initiatives such as C2PA [14]. In both cases, the specific AI
models and integration points are outside the scope of the snaproot core architecture. The
snaproot contribution in this context is the provision of a tamper-evident, provider-independent
anchor that any conforming AI provenance workflow can reference without trusting the snaproot
operator.
8 Discussion
The technical contributions described in Sections 4 through 7 support a higher-level claim that
we made in the introduction: snaproot realizes a trust architecture whose integrity guarantees do
not depend on any single trusted party and remain verifiable across organizational, technological,
and generational boundaries. We now revisit this claim in the light of the technical material
and discuss how it manifests in two illustrative application domains: media authenticity and
compliance.
8.1 The Four-Tier Trust Architecture, in Retrospect
The four tiers introduced in Section 1 are now backed in different ways. The first three are
realized by specific technical mechanisms in the deployed system; the fourth is set out as a
coherent design rather than as a delivered mechanism. User sovereignty is realized through locally
generated keypairs, locally performed hashing, and a verification path that requires no snaproot
infrastructure (Section 5, G5). Within-chain integrity (Section 5, G1) reduces formally to the
second-preimage resistance of SHA-256, and to the safety of Solana consensus for the persistence
of the recorded hash. Cross-fork verifiability (Section 5, G6) follows from the distinction between
safety and liveness: a network event that affects liveness does not retroactively change confirmed
records. Cross-chain trust migration (Section 7.4) is the prospective fourth tier; if realized, it
would extend the architecture so that records can outlive the specific blockchain on which they
were created. For the present system, the long-term existence guarantee is carried by the first
three tiers, with the fourth held in reserve as an additional safety net for horizons that exceed
the lifetime of any single substrate.
A structural property that runs through all four tiers is the separation between existence
proof and authorship proof. The claim that a file with a given hash existed at a given time is
a chain-resident fact, verifiable by anyone with the file and any working RPC endpoint; this
claim is robust to private-key loss, organizational change, and chain migration. The claim that
a specific natural or legal person produced the file is bound to a private key and can be forfeited
or transferred. The two claims compose in the natural way: an identity-anchoring user work-
33

flow rebinds a lost authorship claim to a chain-resident identity-attesting record, recovering the
property in practice while preserving the structural separation in theory.
A practical consequence worth noting explicitly: snaproot users do not need to trust the
snaproot operator to verify their own records. If the snaproot organization were to cease opera-
tions tomorrow, every existing snaproot record on Solana Mainnet would remain fully verifiable
using the public verification protocol of Algorithm 2 against any Solana RPC endpoint. This is
not a contingency or a fallback mechanism; it is the default state of the system. Trust in the
snaproot operator is needed only for convenience features — the web frontend, the certificate ren-
dering, the mobile-app user interface — none of which sit on the critical path for cryptographic
verification.
8.2 Application Domain: Media Authenticity
Generative AI has made it possible to produce highly realistic synthetic images, video, and
audio that cannot be distinguished from authentic material by visual inspection alone [2, 9].
Approaches based on classifying suspected content as “authentic” or “synthetic” are inherently
probabilistic and degrade as generative quality improves: they answer a question (whether a piece
of content is generated) that depends on the state of generative technology, when the answerable
question is whether a piece of content has changed since a known reference point.
snaproot answers the latter question deterministically. Given a published image I that has
been registered on-chain at time t, any later version I
′ 
that differs from I in even a single bit will
produce a different hash and will be detected as modified. Manipulation of an already-published
image, whether by re-encoding, deepfake overlay, or fully synthetic re-rendering of a similar scene,
leaves a chain-evident trace: the modified image’s hash does not appear in the chain, while the
original’s hash does.
Two sub-cases must be distinguished, as we noted in Section 4.7.
Post-publication manipulation. The image is registered before publication. After publica-
tion, an adversary creates a modified or fully fabricated variant. snaproot detects this determin-
istically: the original retains a chain-anchored existence proof; the variant does not. The trust
assumption is that the original was published truthfully.
Pre-publication manipulation. The image is fabricated by the publisher and registered
as if it were authentic. In this case snaproot alone cannot detect the fabrication, since the
registered hash is the hash of the fabricated content. Capture-time anchoring within a trusted
capture application materially reduces this gap: the adversary must compromise either the device
or the application to produce a fraudulent registration, rather than simply post-process a file
before registering it. Combined with hardware-attested capture (an active area in the C2PA
ecosystem [14]), this reduces the trust surface to the integrity of well-defined hardware and
software components rather than to the credibility of the publisher.
In both sub-cases, snaproot complements rather than competes with AI-based detection:
where the latter produces a probabilistic estimate that may be revisited as new generators emerge,
snaproot produces a binary fact that does not depend on generator-specific knowledge.
8.3 Application Domain: Tamper-Evident Records in Regulated Environ-
ments
Many regulatory regimes require organizations to maintain integrity of audit logs, financial
records, or operational documentation for extended retention periods. Such requirements appear
in regimes such as the German GoBD principles for digital business records, ISO/IEC 27001
controls on logging and monitoring, GDPR data-processing logs, SOX-related financial controls,
and NIS2 incident-record obligations. We do not claim that snaproot in itself satisfies any
34

specific control of these regimes; rather, we discuss it as a technical building block that may
complement an organization’s existing compliance mechanisms. The common requirement that
motivates the discussion is that records must be demonstrably unaltered after creation, and that
this demonstration must be acceptable to external auditors.
Existing approaches to this requirement typically rely on organization-controlled storage with
limited write privileges (WORM-style storage), on signatures using organization-held keys, or
on logging to external third-party services. Each of these places at least some trust in a party
that may have an interest in the records’ appearance. WORM-storage relies on the organization
to configure and operate it correctly; organization-signed logs can be reissued under new keys
if the originals are lost or compromised; external logging services are subject to the same trust
assumptions as any third-party service provider.
snaproot offers a structurally different building block that may complement these existing
approaches. By anchoring the hashes of integrity-relevant records on a public blockchain, the
organization commits the records to a substrate that the organization itself does not control. An
auditor can subsequently verify integrity of any specific record by hashing it and looking up the
corresponding on-chain entry — a procedure that requires no cooperation from the organization
being audited and no trust in any party that the organization could plausibly influence. The
trust surface for the integrity check shifts from the organization (which has an incentive in the
audit outcome) to the blockchain substrate (which does not). This is a supplementary integrity
signal alongside the organization’s primary controls, not a replacement for them.
Two operational granularities are relevant for compliance use cases. For records that are
critical individually — privilege escalations, contract signatures, key custody operations — each
event can be anchored separately as its own memo transaction, at a per-event cost dominated
by the Solana transaction fee (Section 6). For high-volume records such as access logs and
system audit trails, aggregated registration via Merkle trees (a roadmap feature, Section 7.2)
allows a single on-chain anchoring transaction to commit to all log events within a fixed period,
amortizing the cost while preserving the per-entry verifiability.
For both granularities, the user-sovereignty property of the trust architecture has a specific
compliance consequence: the organization anchors records under its own wallet, and any auditor
can verify those records without going through snaproot. This avoids creating a new third-party
dependency in the compliance chain.
One caveat applies specifically in this domain. The immutability that makes the ledger
attractive for tamper-evidence is in tension with data-protection requirements that provide for a
right to erasure, such as the GDPR. Anchoring the hash of a record raises no concern, since the
hash is not reversible to its content; but compliance deployments must ensure that no personal
data is written into cleartext metadata, since on-chain data cannot later be erased. The hash-
bound metadata mode on the roadmap (Section 7.2) is the appropriate choice where record
metadata must be retained in a manner compatible with such regimes.
We close this discussion with a deliberate restraint. None of the regulatory regimes named
above recognizes blockchain anchoring as a substitute for its primary control mechanisms; de-
ployments must continue to satisfy those mechanisms in their own right. The contribution of
snaproot in this context is narrower: it provides an externally verifiable integrity signal that an
auditor can check without trusting the audited organization or any single third-party service. A
serious treatment of how this integrates with the control catalogues of a specific regime is beyond
the scope of the present paper.
8.4 Positioning Relative to Prior Hash-Anchoring Systems
OpenTimestamps, OriginStamp, and Chainpoint share with snaproot the hash-anchoring paradigm
and the goal of providing integrity guarantees that do not depend on a trusted authority. We
have argued throughout this paper that snaproot differs from these systems along three proper-
ties: user sovereignty (records are signed by the user, not by an operator’s aggregator), latency
35

profile (sub-five-second confirmation on Devnet, supporting capture-time workflows under typical
conditions), and a designed-in path toward substrate independence (cross-chain trust migration
as an explicit outlook rather than an afterthought).
The first of these is a delivered property of the trust architecture. The second is specific to
the substrate choice and is the main technical reason that the present work positions Solana,
despite its more concentrated validator set compared to Bitcoin, as a reasonable substrate for
this application class. The third is prospective rather than realized; its value at this stage is
that the architecture leaves room for it, not that the system already provides it. The trade-off
in the substrate choice is explicit: snaproot accepts a weaker liveness-decentralization profile in
exchange for a substantially better latency profile, while preserving safety guarantees for already-
confirmed records and holding the cross-chain migration outlook in reserve as a longer-term safety
net.
9 Conclusion
We have presented snaproot, a system for decentralized file integrity verification through blockchain-
anchored cryptographic hashing on Solana. Beyond the basic anchoring mechanism, the contri-
bution of this work is the articulation and partial realization of a four-tier trust architecture
that combines user sovereignty, within-chain integrity, cross-fork verifiability, and a substrate-
independent migration outlook. We have identified the structural separation between existence
proof and authorship proof as a property that distinguishes snaproot from designs in which a sin-
gle secret carries both claims, and have shown that this separation makes the existence guarantee
robust to the loss of any specific key and to the lifetime of any specific operator.
We have formalized the threat model, derived the integrity guarantee from the second-
preimage resistance of SHA-256, and discussed authorship, public verifiability, provider inde-
pendence, and cross-fork verifiability as separate security goals. We have evaluated the system
empirically on Solana Devnet, characterizing hashing performance across file sizes from 1 KB
to 500 MB and registration and verification latencies under typical conditions, and have shown
that the resulting latency profile makes capture-time anchoring of photographs a practical work-
flow rather than an aspirational feature. The system is deployed on Solana Mainnet and is in
productive use.
We have also been explicit about what snaproot does not provide: it does not certify the
authenticity of pre-registration content, it does not currently defend against frontrunning of
unconfirmed registrations, and it does not eliminate the long-term reliance on blockchain archive
availability. We have set out a roadmap and a longer-term outlook to address these limitations
as the system matures, while keeping the core architecture stable.
snaproot is not a replacement for content authentication systems or for compliance frame-
works; rather, it provides a tamper-evident record of a file’s state at a given point in time, with
a trust profile that existing centralized integrity services cannot match. Used together with
capture-time provenance tools and with established compliance frameworks, it can serve as a
structural building block for digital trust in legal documentation, content authentication, and
regulatory-grade record-keeping.
Author Contributions and Intellectual Property
snaproot is an idea, design, and development of Chain Horizon GmbH. The conception, sys-
tem architecture, and implementation of snaproot originated within Chain Horizon GmbH prior
to the preparation of this manuscript. “snaproot” is a registered word mark (Wortmarke) of
Chain Horizon GmbH with the German Patent and Trademark Office (Deutsches Patent- und
Markenamt, DPMA).
36

Arslan Brömme and Tarkan Yavas are affiliated with Chain Horizon GmbH and led the
conception, design, and development of the snaproot system. They are the sole authors of this
manuscript.
All rights, title, and interest in and to snaproot — including, without limitation, the system,
its source code, the name “snaproot”, the associated design, and the corresponding DPMA reg-
istration — remain exclusively with Chain Horizon GmbH. Authorship of this manuscript does
not constitute, transfer, grant, or imply any ownership, license, or other proprietary rights in or
to snaproot or its underlying intellectual property.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the contribution of Ramazan Karataş, who, during his in-
ternship at Chain Horizon GmbH, conducted the empirical evaluation work reported in Section 6,
namely the measurements of hashing performance, transaction latency, throughput, and cost.
Use of AI Tools
The authors used the following AI-assisted tools during the preparation of this manuscript:
ChatGPT (OpenAI, accessed 2025–2026) and Claude Opus 4 (Anthropic, accessed via Claude.ai,
2025–2026). These tools were employed to support literature research, language editing, struc-
turing of the manuscript, and refinement of academic writing.
All intellectual contributions reflected in this manuscript — including research design, anal-
ysis, interpretation, and conclusions — remain solely those of the human authors. Rights in the
snaproot system and its underlying intellectual property are governed by the Author Contribu-
tions and Intellectual Property section above and remain exclusively with Chain Horizon GmbH.
AI-generated outputs were reviewed, edited, and validated by the authors prior to inclusion.
References
[1] Alfred J. Menezes, Paul C. van Oorschot, and Scott A. Vanstone. Handbook of Applied
Cryptography. CRC Press, 1996. ISBN 978-0849385230.
[2] Andreas Rössler, Davide Cozzolino, Luisa Verdoliva, Christian Riess, Justus Thies, and
Matthias Nießner. FaceForensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages
1–11, 2019.
[3] J. R. Prins. DigiNotar certificate authority breach “Operation Black Tulip”. Interim report,
Fox-IT, September 2011.
[4] Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. https://bitcoin.or
g/bitcoin.pdf, 2008.
[5] Stuart Haber and W. Scott Stornetta. How to time-stamp a digital document. Journal of
Cryptology, 3(2):99–111, 1991.
[6] Peter Todd. OpenTimestamps: Scalable, trust-minimized, distributed timestamping with
Bitcoin. https://petertodd.org/2016/opentimestamps-announcement, 2016.
[7] Bela Gipp, Norman Meuschke, and Andre Gernandt. Decentralized trusted timestamping
using the crypto currency Bitcoin. In Proceedings of the iConference 2015, Newport Beach,
CA, USA, March 2015.
37

[8] Wayne Vaughan, Jason Bukowski, and Shawn Wilkinson. Chainpoint: A scalable protocol
for anchoring data in the blockchain and generating blockchain receipts, July 2016. Chain-
point Whitepaper v2.0.
[9] Yuezun Li, Ming-Ching Chang, and Siwei Lyu. In Ictu Oculi: Exposing AI-generated
video by detecting eye blinking. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Workshop on
Information Forensics and Security (WIFS), pages 1–7, 2018.
[10] Juan Benet. IPFS – content addressed, versioned, P2P file system, 2014. arXiv:1407.3561
[cs.NI].
[11] Protocol Labs. Filecoin: A decentralized storage network, 2017. Protocol Labs Whitepaper.
[12] William Entriken, Dieter Shirley, Jacob Evans, and Nastassia Sachs. ERC-721 non-fungible
token standard, 2018. Ethereum Improvement Proposal 721.
[13] Sarah Barrington and Nick Merrill. The “Fungibility” of non-fungible tokens: A quantitative
analysis of ERC-721 metadata, 2022. arXiv:2209.14517 [cs.CY].
[14] Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity. C2PA technical specification, 2023.
Version 1.3.
[15] Ben Laurie, Adam Langley, and Emilia Kasper. Certificate transparency, June 2013. RFC
6962, IETF.
[16] Leslie Lamport. Proving the correctness of multiprocess programs. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, SE-3(2):125–143, 1977. doi: 10.1109/TSE.1977.229904.
[17] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Secure hash standard (SHS). FIPS Publi-
cation 180-4, NIST, 2015.
[18] Anatoly Yakovenko. Solana: A new architecture for a high performance blockchain, 2018.
Solana Labs Technical Whitepaper, v0.8.13.
[19] Gilles Brassard, Peter Høyer, and Alain Tapp. Quantum algorithm for the collision problem.
In Proceedings of LATIN’98: Theoretical Informatics, volume 1380 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 163–169, 1998.
[20] Luuk J. Spreeuwers, Anne J. Hendrikse, and Kees J. Gerritsen. Evaluation of automatic face
recognition for automatic border control on actual data recorded of travellers at Schiphol
airport. In Arslan Brömme and Christoph Busch, editors, Proceedings of the International
Conference of the Biometrics Special Interest Group (BIOSIG 2012), volume P-196 of Lec-
ture Notes in Informatics (LNI), pages 1–6, Bonn, Germany, 2012. Gesellschaft für Infor-
matik.
38
