
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2606.08529

Scaffold Effects on GAIA: A Controlled Comparison
Jason Starace jstarace@mac.com
Independent Researcher
Abstract
Published agent capability scores conflate what a model can do with what its scaffold lets
it do, and the magnitude of this elicitation gap is not well characterized under controlled
conditions. This study executes a pre-registered controlled comparison of three scaffolds
(ReAct, a Planner-Actor-Rater multi-agent design, and planner-then-executor) across five
models from three providers (Claude Opus 4.7, Sonnet 4.6, Haiku 4.5; Gemini 3.1 Pro
Preview; GPT-5.5) on GAIA validation Levels 1 and 2, holding tasks and conditions fixed,
with three attempts per question. Scaffold choice alone moves measured accuracy by as much
as 28 percentage points within a single model (Opus, Level 2, robust slice), confirming the
pre-registered hypothesis that scaffold variation produces gaps of at least 10 points. The pre-
registered prediction that more capable models would be less scaffold-sensitive is rejected
in direction: scaffold effects vary significantly by model in every dataset slice, but the
most capable Anthropic model gains the most from structured scaffolds at the harder level,
and tier-scaling holds only at Level 1 under the robust slice. The multi-agent advantage
over ReAct at Level 2 appears within the Anthropic family but not for the cross-provider
models, making model family rather than capability tier the conditioning variable, and the
predicted planner-executor advantage on file-reading tasks is falsified. Structured scaffolds
make fewer tool calls yet recover more often from mid-trajectory errors at the harder level,
and a single cell (Gemini with planner-then-executor) is the cheapest at both levels and the
most accurate at Level 2. These results indicate that single-scaffold capability numbers are
scaffold-conditional estimates and that the elicitation gap is not guaranteed to shrink as
models improve.
1 Introduction
Frontier model evaluations treat reported performance as measured capability while acknowledging the
measurement is bounded by elicitation quality (Pimpale et al., 2025; Gringras & Salahshoor, 2026; Kapoor
et al., 2026; Barnett & Thiergart, 2024); the METR time horizon paper (Kwa et al., 2026) discusses this in
its limitations appendix, noting that proper elicitation can make a very large difference in performance and
treating its published numbers as reasonable lower bounds. As models grow more capable, the magnitude
of this gap becomes increasingly consequential for evaluation methodology.
Published capability scores therefore conflate two things: what the model can do, and what the scaffold lets
it do. When one team measures Model A with their best scaffold and another measures Model B with theirs,
the comparison is confounded by scaffold quality, and capability extrapolations and time-horizon forecasts
built on these numbers silently embed the confound.
To our knowledge, no controlled study has measured the magnitude of scaffold effects on GAIA across a
current frontier lineup; adjacent work is discussed in Section 2. This study addresses that gap, evaluating
three scaffolds (Section 3.3) across five models, three flagship frontier models (Claude Opus 4.7, GPT-5.5,
Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview) and two additional Anthropic-family models (Claude Sonnet 4.6, Claude Haiku
4.5), on GAIA validation Levels 1 and 2. GAIA is chosen because its tasks require an agent loop, making it
an appropriate benchmark for scaffold comparison.
We make three contributions: a controlled comparison isolating scaffold effects (three scaffolds, five models,
GAIA Levels 1 and 2, with tasks and conditions held fixed across cells), quantifying the elicitation impact
1
arXiv:2606.08529v1 [cs.AI] 7 Jun 2026

named but not characterized in METR’s framework (Kwa et al., 2026); per-cell accuracy estimates with
bootstrap confidence intervals and a mixed-effects logistic regression testing the scaffold-by-model interaction,
providing statistical claims about scaffold sensitivity rather than point estimates alone; and public release of
code, configuration files
1
, per-attempt evaluation logs
2
, and the pre-registered sample ID snapshot (Starace,
2026), enabling full reproduction of the analysis pipeline.
1.1 Research questions and hypotheses
This study tests the hypotheses and addresses the research questions pre-registered by Starace (Starace,
2026). The pre-registered experiment split the questions into primary (1-3) and secondary (4-5). Since all
five are addressed in this study, they are presented as a flat list.
1.1.1 Research questions
1. RQ1: How much does measured GAIA accuracy change as scaffold varies, holding model and task
fixed?
2. RQ2: Does scaffold sensitivity vary by model? Specifically, does the gap between best-scaffold and
worst-scaffold accuracy shrink as model capability grows, or does it persist?
3. RQ3: What behavioral signatures (action count, tokens emitted, time-to-completion, recovery-from-
failure rate) accompany scaffold-driven accuracy differences?
4. RQ4: How does cost-per-correct-answer compare across scaffold-model combinations?
5. RQ5: Within the Claude 4.x family (Haiku, Sonnet, Opus), does scaffold sensitivity scale predictably
with model tier?
1.1.2 Hypotheses
• H1: Scaffold variation produces at least a 10 percentage-point gap between best and worst scaffold
for at least one model on GAIA Level 1.
• H2: Frontier models (Opus 4.7, Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview, GPT-5.5) will show smaller scaffold gaps
than mid-tier models, consistent with the hypothesis that elicitation matters less when the model is
more capable.
• H3: Triframe-style multi-agent scaffolds will outperform single-agent ReAct on GAIA Level 2 but
not on Level 1.
• H4: Planner-then-executor scaffolds will outperform on tasks with file-reading components, where
planning a sequence of operations matters.
2 Related work
Scaffold variation has appeared frequently in agent evaluation work, but typically as an instrument rather
than the object of study. Yao et al. (2023) introduce ReAct, the alternating reason-act loop that is now a
standard agent scaffold; AgentBench (Liu et al., 2025) evaluates LLMs as agents across eight environments
while holding the agent loop roughly fixed; Snell et al. (2024) examine inference-time compute allocation
rather than loop structure. Across this line, scaffold is part of the apparatus, not the manipulated variable.
METR’s time horizon framework (Kwa et al., 2026) is the canonical statement of the elicitation-as-lower-
bound problem motivating this study: its limitations appendix (E.4) treats measured horizons as elicitation-
bounded lower bounds, and the paper spent two to three engineer-weeks tuning scaffolds for two of its models
1
Anonymized repository: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/gaia-scaffold-comparison-ECBF/
2
Link available on acceptance.
2

with lighter elicitation for the rest of its sweep. It names the elicitation gap and acknowledges its size matters
for interpretation, but does not characterize the gap through controlled comparison on a shared benchmark.
Recent work quantifies scaffold and elicitation effects in adjacent settings. Pimpale et al. (2025) forecast
frontier agent capabilities under a low-versus-high elicitation split, reporting 33% versus 62.2% for Claude
Sonnet 3.5 on SWE-Bench Verified, a roughly 30 percentage-point gap on a single model-benchmark pair.
Ndzomga (2026) evaluate 33 scaffolds and 70+ model configurations across eight benchmarks, finding abso-
lute score prediction degrades under scaffold-driven shift while rank order remains stable. Gringras (2026)
report one of the largest controlled scaffold studies on safety benchmarks (N = 62,808; six frontier models,
four deployment configurations), finding scaffold effects on measured safety are small once evaluation format
is held constant. At the publication level, Gringras & Salahshoor (2026) audit 4,766 LLM evaluation papers
and find a median publication elicitation gap of 10.85 ECI points behind the frontier at evaluation time:
where the present study measures how much scaffold choice shifts a single model’s measured capability,
Gringras & Salahshoor (2026) measure how much published claims drift from frontier conditions through
reporting practices.
This study is a controlled replication. The scaffold-matters claim is not novel: by 2026 the conventional
wisdom in agent evaluation is that scaffold choice produces meaningful performance differences. What
remains under-specified is the magnitude under controlled comparison on a general-assistant benchmark,
whether it scales predictably with model capability, and how it interacts with task difficulty. Prior controlled
scaffold work covers rank preservation, safety, and elicitation forecasts on coding benchmarks; none addresses
general-assistant capability evaluation across a current frontier lineup. This study does: three scaffolds, five
models including the full Anthropic Opus/Sonnet/Haiku ladder, GAIA Levels 1 and 2, with hypotheses and
design pre-registered by Starace prior to data collection (Starace, 2026).
3 Methodology
3.1 Testbed
The testbed is GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023), a benchmark of 466 general-assistant tasks requiring multi-
modality handling, web browsing, file reading, and multi-step reasoning. Tasks are stratified into three
levels of difficulty. Validation answers are public; test answers are held by the Hugging Face leaderboard.
This study evaluates validation Levels 1 and 2; Level 3 is excluded for scope.
3.2 Evaluation framework
Evaluations are implemented using Inspect AI (UK AI Security Institute, 2024a), an open-source framework
for large language model evaluations developed by the UK AI Security Institute. The companion package
inspect_evals (UK AI Security Institute, 2024b) provides reference implementations of common bench-
marks, including built-in support for GAIA at task granularity (gaia_level1, gaia_level2, gaia_level3)
and a working ReAct baseline. The official GAIA scorer is included in the implementation and used directly
without modification; no model-graded scoring is used.
Inspect 0.3.217 did not yet pass ToolConfig.include_server_side_tool_invocations=True when com-
bining Gemini’s native google_search with function tools, so a local patch was applied to the provider for
the duration of this study. The patch enables the same tool combination across all five models, preserving
like-for-like comparison. Full patch details are in Appendix A.
3.3 Scaffolds
Three scaffolds are evaluated, all implemented in Inspect AI. S2 and S3 share an identical tool set: web search
(via Inspect’s web_search tool, which routes to provider-native search where available), a sandboxed shell
(bash), a Python sandbox (python), and a text editor (text_editor). S1, the unmodified inspect_evals
baseline, carries that implementation’s surface instead: bash, python, and Inspect’s stateful web_browser
(Section 6).
3

S1: ReAct (baseline). The standard single-agent loop. The model receives the task and plans and acts
in alternation, with tool access for browsing, code execution, and file reading. This is the inspect_evals
default GAIA solver and acts as the baseline against which the other scaffolds are compared. The default
ReAct prompt from inspect_evals is used without modification.
S2: Planner-Actor-Rater (PAR). Three roles share a task state: a planner that decomposes the task, an actor
that executes individual subtasks with tools, and a rater that reviews progress and signals completion or
revision. The pre-registration named this scaffold “triframe-style multi-agent”; the rename and its rationale
are documented in Section 3.6. Full role prompts are provided in Appendix C.1.
S3: Planner-then-Executor. Two phases: an explicit planning step where the model produces a written plan
with no tool access, followed by an execution phase where a fresh prompt receives the plan and executes
against tools. S3 tests whether separating planning from execution helps relative to interleaved planning and
action. The same model is used for both phases; cross-model variants are out of scope, as varying the model
within a scaffold would confound scaffold effect with model-mixing effect. Full phase prompts are provided
in Appendix C.2.
3.4 Models
Five models from three providers are evaluated: Claude Opus 4.7, Claude Sonnet 4.6, and Claude Haiku
4.5 (Anthropic); Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview (Google); and GPT-5.5 (OpenAI). The Anthropic ladder (Opus,
Sonnet, Haiku) is the primary analysis vehicle for RQ5 (whether scaffold sensitivity scales predictably with
model tier within a family). The cross-provider entries (Gemini, GPT-5.5) provide flagship-to-flagship checks
for the main findings.
Model IDs are pinned to dated snapshots where the provider treats the dateless ID as an alias (Haiku
4.5, GPT-5.5). Anthropic 4.6+ models use the dateless canonical ID, which is itself a pinned snapshot.
Gemini preview models cannot be pinned beyond the preview string and carry a reproducibility risk that is
documented in the limitations.
Reasoning mode is not enabled for any model; default response generation is used across all providers. This
deviates from the pre-registration and is documented in Section 3.6; the controlled-comparison structure is
unaffected because reasoning is held constant (off) across all cells.
3.5 Experimental design
Design and attempts. The experimental design is a 3 (scaffold) × 5 (model) factorial across GAIA validation
Levels 1 and 2. Each cell is run with three attempts per question to support per-cell variance estimation.
With 53 questions at Level 1 and 86 at Level 2, the full design specifies 15 × 139 × 3 = 6,255 validation runs.
Metrics. For each (model, scaffold, question, attempt), the following are recorded: binary accuracy from
GAIA’s official scorer, the primary outcome for RQ1 and RQ2; action count (tool calls executed), total
tokens, and wall-clock time to completion, supporting RQ3’s behavioral signatures; and cost in dollars per
attempt, computed from token counts at provider rates (hereafter log-derived cost, distinct from the billed
amount, a gap discussed in Section 6), feeding RQ4’s cost-per-correct ranking.
Statistical analysis. The confirmatory analyses follow the pre-registered plan: per-cell bootstrap accuracy
with 95% CIs, the max-minus-min scaffold gap per (model, level) as the primary statistic for H1 and H2, a
mixed-effects logistic regression with a scaffold × model interaction as the inferential test for H2, and dollars
per correct answer ranked across cells for RQ4. Each analysis is specified in full in its results subsection.
Reproducibility infrastructure. A wrapper script re-runs only samples without a clean completion across prior
.eval logs, retrying Inspect-level errors and unexecuted samples but never wrong answers, and merges mul-
tiple logs per shard at analysis time. The ordered list of GAIA validation task IDs per level, generated from
a direct load_dataset() call against gaia-benchmark/GAIA (2023_all, validation split), is committed to
configs/gaia_sample_ids.json, making the dataset-to-position mapping part of the experimental record.
4

3.6 Deviations from pre-registration
This subsection documents deviations from the pre-registered methodology (Starace, 2026); Section 3.8 of
the pre-registration licenses prompt modifications for unambiguous implementation defects.
Reasoning mode. The pre-registration specified reasoning mode enabled, with default budget, for all models
supporting it. The runs applied no reasoning configuration, which Inspect AI treats as disabled: pilot work
showed reasoning costs scaling unpredictably across providers, and reasoning off preserved the comparison
under budget constraints. The comparison structure is unaffected, since reasoning is constant (off) across
all cells.
Scaffold S2 renamed. The pre-registration named S2 “triframe-style multi-agent,” modeled on METR’s
triframe agent (Kwa et al., 2026), while noting the implementation is an approximation rather than a faithful
reproduction. The three-role design (planner, actor, rater) differs substantively from METR’s triframe, a
single-model plan-and-vote loop, and is renamed Planner-Actor-Rater (PAR); the pre-registered H3 label
“triframe-style” refers to the same scaffold.
Input truncation. Accumulated scaffold context occasionally exceeded model context windows, most notably
the 200K ceilings of Claude Haiku and Sonnet. Input truncation at 200K tokens, dropping the oldest tool-call
traces first, was implemented under the Section 3.8 license. It applies to the rerun of failed cells only; cells
completed before it was added are unaffected.
Tool surface. As run, S1 retained the unmodified inspect_evals tool set rather than the constant surface
specified in the pre-registration; the resulting confound in s1 contrasts is discussed in Section 6.
Incomplete cells. The full design specifies 6,255 validation runs (3 attempts × 5 models × 3 scaffolds ×
139 questions). The validation run completed 5,907 of these; 15 of the 30 (model, scaffold, level) cells are
partial, driven primarily by the provider-side serialization defect described in Appendix D, with smaller
contributions from context-overflow, content-filter, and PDF page-limit failures. Affected cells are listed in
Appendix D. Analyses run on completed attempts only. The pre-registered held-out test-set submission was
not executed; Section 6 discusses the resulting contamination control.
4 Results
Sections 4.1 and 4.2 present the pre-registered confirmatory analyses testing H1 through H4.. Each analysis
is reported under three slices of the dataset. The primary slice includes every attempt-unit and treats errored
units as incorrect, matching the headline accuracy denominator used elsewhere. The robust (no flag) slice
excludes units carrying the provider_serialization_bug flag described in Appendix D, isolating scaffold-
attributable variation from the SDK-level defect. The intersection slice retains only sample_ids for which
every (model, scaffold) cell at that level had at least one attempt-unit complete without an Inspect-level
error, controlling for question-set asymmetry on a shared question pool.
4.1 Scaffold gap (H1 and H2)
4.1.1 Per-cell outcomes
Each (model, scaffold, level) cell was attempted three times per sample_id under the design described in
Section 3.5, giving 159 attempt-units per L1 cell and 258 per L2 cell. Per-cell accuracy is visualized in Figure 3
(Appendix F); completion rates, accuracy, and failure-mode bucket counts for all five models are reported per
cell in Table 2 (Appendix E). Two accuracy columns are reported there: accuracy overall, dividing correct
completions by the full attempt count with errored units counted incorrect, and accuracy on completed,
dividing by non-errored units only; the columns diverge only where provider-side issues prevented completion
of some attempts. Completion rates are at 1.00 for every cross-provider cell. Within the Anthropic ladder,
the largest gaps belong to Opus (0.82 s2 L2, 0.79 s3 L2, 0.94 s2 L1, 0.84 s3 L1), driven almost entirely by
provider_serialization_bug-flagged units (Appendix P), and to Haiku on s2 and s3 L2 (0.81 and 0.88),
driven primarily by the same flag with a secondary prompt_too_long contribution (Appendix D). Accuracy
5

Figure 1: Scaffold gap (max minus min accuracy across the three scaffolds) per (model, level) with 95%
bootstrap CIs, shown for the primary, robust, and intersection slices. The dashed line separates the Anthropic
ladder from the cross-provider models.
on completed is in most cases comparable to or higher than accuracy overall, indicating that the errored
units would not, on average, have raised the cell’s headline number had they completed cleanly.
4.1.2 Bootstrap accuracy
Confidence intervals around each per-cell point estimate are computed by clustered bootstrap: sample_ids
are resampled with replacement and an included sample_id contributes all of its attempt-units as a block,
preserving the within-question dependence of the three-attempts design. 5,000 resamples per cell with a fixed
seed give the 95% interval from the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles; the seed is shared across the three slices so
differences between slices reflect only the input pool. The per-cell dot plot (Figure 3, Appendix F) makes
two patterns visible. The cross-provider CIs overlap heavily across scaffolds, with one exception: Gemini
L2, where the s3 interval sits clear of s1. The within-Anthropic ladder shows non-overlapping CIs for Haiku
L1 (s3 separates from s1 and s2) and for Sonnet and Opus L2 under the robust slice (s1 separates from s2
and s3).
4.1.3 Scaffold gap statistic
The scaffold gap is the maximum minus the minimum accuracy across the three scaffolds for a given (model,
level) cell. Its CI extends the per-cell bootstrap: in each of the 5,000 iterations, sample_ids are resampled
once per (model, level) and the same picks feed all three scaffold accuracies, so the within-question dependence
across scaffolds is preserved and the gap CI is exact rather than a propagated independent-CI approximation.
Figure 1 displays the gap and its CI for each (model, level, slice) combination. The full headline gap tables
across all three slices, including which scaffold sits at the max and min, are in Appendix G; the complete
pairwise contrasts (s2−s1, s3−s1, s3−s2) are in Appendix H.
At Level 1, the gap is small for the three frontier models (Opus 0.13, Gemini 0.06, GPT-5 0.04, primary slice)
and largest for Haiku (0.23). At Level 2, the primary-slice gaps are 0.20 for Haiku, 0.10 for Sonnet, 0.14 for
Opus, 0.17 for Gemini, and 0.06 for GPT-5. Under the primary slice the Anthropic ladder is non-monotonic
in tier at both levels: Sonnet, not Opus, is the least scaffold-sensitive (Appendix I).
The robust slice changes this picture for the Anthropic models at Level 2. Removing flagged units expands
the L2 gap for Sonnet (0.10 → 0.22) and Opus (0.14 → 0.28) while leaving the cross-provider gaps unchanged:
the SDK defect selectively suppressed s2 and s3 accuracies, so removing it widens rather than shrinks the
visible scaffold gaps. Opus L1 inverts in the opposite direction (0.13 → 0.03) because s1 was Opus’s strongest
L1 scaffold, so the same mechanism collapses that gap instead. The intersection slice tracks the primary
slice closely at both levels, consistent with the small reduction in retained sample_ids.
6

Read against H1, the L2 results give clear positive evidence under all three slices for Haiku, Sonnet, and
Opus, weaker positive evidence for Gemini, and a borderline case for GPT-5, whose gap CIs exclude zero
by a narrow margin. H1 is supported but the magnitude is highly model-dependent. The within-Anthropic
ladder is taken up in Section 4.5.
4.1.4 Mixed-effects test of H2
H2 predicted that less-capable models would show larger scaffold effects. This analysis adds the inferential
test pre-registered in Section 3.6 of the pre-registration: a logistic mixed-effects model with success as the
binary outcome, sample_id as a random intercept, and scaffold, model, and level as fixed effects, fit via lme4’s
glmer under the pymer4 wrapper with reference levels s1 and Opus. The H2 test is the likelihood-ratio test
comparing a no-interaction baseline against a full scaffold × model interaction. The interaction model’s
marginally elevated gradient at convergence (0.001 to 0.013 across slices) is above lme4’s strict threshold but
well within practically converged range; we treat the fits as usable for inference. Full coefficient tables and
fit metadata are in Appendix J.
The LRT rejects the null of no interaction in every slice (χ
2
(8) = 82.95 primary, 122.18 robust, 81.38
intersection; all p < 0.0001): scaffold effects are statistically distinguishable across models. This part of H2
holds.
The directionality of the interaction does not match H2’s prediction that scaffold effects shrink as capability
increases. Under the robust slice the s2 and s3 main effects for the Opus reference are strongly positive
(+1.20 and +1.29 log-odds), while most scaffold:model interactions for the non-Opus models are negative
and significant (full coefficients in Appendix J): read against the Opus reference, the other models gain
less from s2 and s3 than Opus does. H2’s directional claim is falsified. The descriptive counterpart makes
the direction concrete: the largest robust-slice gap in the experiment belongs to Opus L2 (0.28), the most
capable Anthropic model, while Haiku’s comparable gap (0.26) reflects a baseline floor that s2 and s3 do not
lift it out of, which the model captures as Haiku’s negative interactions.
Read against H2 specifically: the inferential test rejects the null, but the direction of variation does not
support the tier-scaling claim. The data are consistent with a more capability-permissive scaffold benefit:
Opus gains the most from structured scaffolds at the harder level. The conservative reading is that H2’s
prediction holds at L1 under the robust slice and fails at L2 under the same slice; the pooled mixed-effects
model reports the L2-dominated falsification because L2 has more observations and larger gap magnitudes.
4.2 Pairwise hypothesis tests (H3 and H4)
4.2.1 Triframe versus ReAct (H3)
H3 predicted that triframe-style multi-agent scaffolds (s2) would outperform single-agent ReAct (s1) on GAIA
Level 2 but not on Level 1. The test statistic is the per-(model, level, slice) accuracy difference acc_s2 minus
acc_s1 with 95% sample_id-clustered bootstrap CI; the full contrasts are tabulated in Appendix H, where
the pair is reported as s1−s2, the negation of the H3 contrast. A positive s2 minus s1 value means triframe
outperformed ReAct; the H3 prediction is that L2 cells are positive and L1 cells are not.
Under the primary slice, the L1 prediction holds in the weak sense that no L1 cell shows a triframe advantage
with a CI strictly above zero; Opus L1 is the most negative (-0.069) and Sonnet L1 the most positive (+0.069).
The L2 prediction holds in part: all five models show positive point estimates, but only Haiku (+0.112, CI
[0.023, 0.202]) and Opus (+0.140, CI [0.062, 0.221]) have CIs strictly above zero, while Gemini (+0.058) and
GPT-5 (+0.016) span zero. Triframe provides a meaningful L2 advantage for the Anthropic family but not
for the cross-provider models.
The robust slice makes the L2 finding considerably stronger inside the Anthropic family: removing the
provider_serialization_bug units, the s2 minus s1 estimates at L2 are +0.193 (Haiku), +0.221 (Sonnet),
and +0.279 (Opus), all with CIs strictly above zero, while the cross-provider L2 estimates are unchanged
because the flag did not affect them. At L1 under the robust slice, Sonnet is the lone CI strictly above zero
(+0.129 [0.030, 0.232]); the other four models are consistent with the L1 prediction.
7

Read against H3 specifically: the prediction is supported within the Anthropic family at L2, holds at L1
except the robust-slice Sonnet cell, and is not supported for the cross-provider models at L2. H3 is therefore
conditionally supported, with the conditioning variable being model family rather than capability tier per
se.
4.2.2 Planner-executor on file-reading tasks (H4)
H4 predicted that planner-then-executor scaffolds (s3) would outperform on tasks with file-reading compo-
nents. We operationalize file-reading tasks as the document-attachment subset of GAIA validation: tasks
shipping with .xlsx, .pdf, .docx, .pptx, .txt, or .csv attachments per the dataset metadata (six L1 and ten L2
sample_ids). The H4 test is the difference-of-differences on s3 minus s1: the s3-over-s1 advantage on the file
subset minus the s3-over-s1 advantage on the non-file complement. A positive DoD with CI strictly above
zero supports H4 at that cell; a negative DoD with CI strictly below zero contradicts it.
Across the ten (model, level) cells under the primary slice, the prediction is supported in one (Opus L1,
DoD = +0.142, CI [0.030, 0.252]), contradicted in four (Haiku L1, Haiku L2, Gemini L2, GPT-5 L2), and
inconclusive in five; the full tables for all slices are in Appendix K. Two interpretive caveats bound the
negative cells. Haiku sits at floor on documents (16.7% accuracy on L1 documents under s3, 30.0% under
s3 at L2, the lowest cell-and-subset accuracies in the experiment), so its negative DoDs reflect document
handling generally rather than a planner-executor-specific failure mode. Gemini and GPT-5 at L2 hit ceiling
on the file subset under s1 (both at 100%), so planning overhead cannot pay off on tasks the model already
solves reactively.
None of the three robustness checks rescues H4. Under the robust slice the lone supporting cell disappears:
Opus L1 drops to -0.002 (CI [-0.083, 0.086]), attributing the primary-slice positive to flagged units. The
intersection slice restores the Opus L1 cell but introduces no others, and the any-file expansion tracks the
document-only result closely.
Read against H4 specifically: the prediction is falsified, with one supporting cell out of ten that does not
survive the robust check; the floor and ceiling caveats above make the contradicting cells equally unreliable
as evidence in the opposite direction.
4.3 Behavioral signatures (RQ3)
RQ3 asks what behavioral signatures accompany scaffold-driven accuracy differences. We report four per-cell
summary statistics under the primary slice: mean action count (tool calls per attempt), mean output tokens
emitted, mean working time on completed attempts, and recovery-from-failure rate (fraction of attempts
with at least one mid-trajectory tool error that nonetheless produced a correct submission). Output tokens
are the headline token statistic: provider-reported totals fold in prompt-caching streams billed and surfaced
differently across providers, leaving output the only cross-provider-comparable measure. Full per-cell tables
with the input, output, cache-read, cache-write, and total decomposition under all three slices are in Ap-
pendix L; the input/output split alone is in Appendix M. CIs are 95% sample_id-clustered bootstrap, 5,000
resamples, seed shared with the rest of the validation analyses.
Three of the four signatures order the scaffolds monotonically. Averaged across the five models at L2,
mean action count is 22.0 under s1, 8.8 under s2, and 6.4 under s3; mean output tokens are 4.8k, 3.1k,
and 2.9k; mean working time on completed attempts is 151s, 115s, and 93s. L1 shows the same ordering
with compressed values. The reactive baseline dispatches roughly three times the tool calls of planner-
then-executor and emits roughly 65% more output tokens, and the action-count ordering is stable within
cells: every model uses fewer actions under s3 than under s1; output tokens follow for every model except
Opus, which emits slightly more under s3 at both levels. The per-cell extremes are all reactive-baseline
configurations on the harder level (Appendix L).
Recovery from failure inverts the pattern. Averaged across models at L2, recovery rate is 0.38 under s1, 0.57
under s2, and 0.51 under s3. At L1 the rates are lower and the inversion does not hold, but four of fifteen
L1 cells have no mid-trajectory errors at all (undefined recovery rate), so the L1 averages are noisy. The L2
finding is the substantive one: structured scaffolds make fewer tool calls overall but the in-trajectory errors
8

Figure 2: Accuracy versus realized cost per correct for every (model, scaffold, level) cell, primary slice; x-axis
logarithmic. Color encodes model; marker shape encodes scaffold.
that do occur are more often recovered from. We do not have a mechanistic claim about why; candidate
explanations are taken up in the Discussion. The recovery numbers are descriptive context, not a hypothesis
test.
ReAct is thus the most expensive scaffold by every behavioral metric, runs longest, and recovers least often
from in-trajectory failure, yet s1 remains competitive on L1 for some models (Opus s1 is the most accurate
Opus L1 cell at 0.83): the structural overhead of s2 and s3 frequently does not buy a matching accuracy
gain (Section 4.1.3).
4.4 Cost per correct
This subsection presents the pre-registered RQ4 analysis: cost-per-correct rankings across the 30 (model,
scaffold, level) cells. The headline metric is realized cost per correct: the sum of log-derived dollar costs across
every attempt-unit in a cell divided by the cell’s count of correct completions, with errored units counted as
incorrect, matching the headline accuracy denominator (Table 2, Appendix E). A secondary metric, happy-
path cost per correct, restricts both numerator and denominator to completed units; the two coincide at 100%
completion and diverge where errored units carried token cost. Sample_id-clustered bootstrap CIs (5,000
resamples, seed shared with the Section 4.1 analyses) accompany every estimate. Full per-level rankings
under all three slices are in Appendix N; the realized-versus-happy-path comparison is in Appendix O.
Figure 2 plots accuracy against realized cost per correct under the primary slice for every cell. Three cells
anchor the L1 Pareto frontier: Gemini s3 ($0.14/correct at 84.3% accuracy), GPT-5 s3 ($0.17 at 84.9%),
and GPT-5 s2 ($0.20 at 84.3%). Three anchor the L2 frontier: Gemini s3 ($0.23 at 86.0%), GPT-5 s3 ($0.29
at 82.2%), and Gemini s2 ($0.41 at 75.2%). Gemini s3 is the cheapest cell on both panels and the most
accurate at L2; at L1 it concedes 0.6 points to GPT-5 s3 at lower cost, leaving both on the frontier.
Two within-provider L1 features deserve attention. Sonnet s1 is more expensive per correct ($0.44) than
Opus s1 ($0.24) despite cheaper per-token rates, the product of higher token usage and lower accuracy on
the baseline scaffold. And Haiku s3 sits at the bottom of the panel: the accuracy collapse on the planner-
executor scaffold (22.6%) makes Haiku a poor cost-per-correct choice at L1 despite the cheapest per-token
rates in the study.
At L2 the spread widens substantially: the cheapest cell (Gemini s3, $0.23) and the most expensive (Sonnet
s2, $1.20) differ by a factor of 5.2, and the five most expensive L2 cells under the primary slice are all
Anthropic. Three of those five are partially driven by units that paid token cost before erroring under the
provider_serialization_bug pattern (Appendix D): spend incurred without contributing to the correct
denominator. The robust slice (Appendix N) confirms the inflation, dropping Sonnet s2 L2 from $1.20 to
9

$0.97, without changing the qualitative ranking: Sonnet s2 L2 remains the worst cell, the Anthropic L2
cluster remains more expensive than the cross-provider cluster, and Gemini s3 remains the headline winner.
The realized-versus-happy-path comparison (Appendix O) tracks the same pattern, with the largest diver-
gence at Sonnet s2 L2. Realized remains the conservative procurement estimate: what an operator running
the experiment as configured would actually pay per correct answer.
Read against RQ4, the picture is dominated by two findings. First, Gemini s3 is the cheapest cell at both
levels and the most accurate at L2 under all three slices, the strongest single cell at the current pricing
snapshot. Second, the realized cost-per-correct gap inside the Anthropic family is large at L2: Haiku,
Sonnet, and Opus cells span $0.52 to $1.20 under the primary slice against $0.23 to $0.51 for the comparable
cross-provider cells, and the within-Anthropic dispersion is wider than the within-Gemini or within-GPT-
5 dispersion, indicating that scaffold choice imposes a larger cost penalty on the Anthropic family at the
harder level. The robust slice moves the two findings in opposite directions: removing flagged units expands
Anthropic L2 scaffold-accuracy gaps (Section 4.1.3) while compressing the cost-per-correct spread, since
flagged units carried spend without correct answers.
4.5 Within-Anthropic tier sensitivity
This subsection addresses RQ5: within the Claude 4.x family, does scaffold sensitivity scale predictably with
model tier? The robust slice gives a split verdict: the L1 gap ladder is cleanly monotonic and decreasing
(0.25, 0.13, 0.03), consistent with the H2 prediction, while the L2 robust ladder is flat and large (0.26, 0.22,
0.28), with Opus the most scaffold-sensitive Anthropic model rather than the least. The full ladder analysis
across all three slices, and the two interpretations of the L2 finding that the data cannot adjudicate between,
are in Appendix I.
5 Discussion
Scaffold choice changes what an evaluation measures. The headline answer to RQ1 is unambiguous: holding
model, tasks, and conditions fixed, scaffold choice alone moves measured GAIA accuracy by as much as 28
points within a single model, the spread between Opus L2’s best scaffold (s2, 0.84) and worst (s1, 0.56) under
the robust slice. H1’s pre-registered threshold of a 10 percentage-point gap for at least one model at Level
1 is cleared by Haiku under all three slices (Section 4.1.3), and the L2 gaps are larger still for most models.
A reader comparing two models evaluated under different scaffolds could easily attribute to the model a
difference that belongs to the agent loop. This is the elicitation confound named by Kwa et al. (2026) made
concrete: the magnitude observed here is in the same range as the roughly 30 percentage-point single-model
elicitation gap reported by Pimpale et al. (2025) on SWE-Bench Verified, suggesting the phenomenon is not
benchmark-specific.
Scaffold sensitivity does not diminish with capability. H2 predicted that more capable models would be less
scaffold-sensitive, and the evidence splits. The inferential test rejects equal scaffold effects across models
in every slice (Section 4.1.4), so sensitivity is genuinely model-dependent, but the direction contradicts the
prediction: most non-Opus interaction coefficients are negative under the robust slice, and the descriptive
tier ladder (Section 4.5) is monotonic in H2’s direction only at L1 under that slice. At L2 the robust ladder is
flat and large, with Opus the most scaffold-sensitive Anthropic model. Appendix I offers two interpretations
the data cannot adjudicate between. Under either, the consequence for evaluation methodology is the same:
the elicitation gap is not guaranteed to shrink as models improve, and within the Anthropic family at the
harder level it grows.
Family, not tier, conditions the multi-agent advantage. H3 predicted s2 over s1 at L2 but not L1, on the
intuition that decomposition pays off when tasks are hard. At L1, no model shows an s2 advantage with
a CI above zero under the primary slice; under the robust slice the lone exception is Sonnet (+0.13, CI
[0.03, 0.23]). The L2 half held only within the Anthropic family, with robust-slice advantages whose CIs
sit strictly above zero, while Gemini and GPT-5 show small advantages indistinguishable from zero. The
conditioning variable is model family rather than capability tier: Haiku and Opus sit at opposite ends of the
Anthropic ladder yet both benefit, while two frontier models from other providers do not. The behavioral
10

signatures (Section 4.3) give this a mechanism-shaped outline without establishing a mechanism: ReAct
makes the most tool calls, runs longest, and recovers least often from in-trajectory tool errors at L2, where
mid-trajectory errors actually occur. Two candidate explanations are plausible but untested: an error under
s2 passes through a rater role positioned to flag and re-route it, and an error under s3 lands inside an explicit
plan that may survive the failed step. The data cannot identify the mechanism; the practical reading is that
multi-agent structure is not a uniform upgrade, and porting a scaffold finding across model families is not
safe.
Planning ahead did not help where it was predicted to. H4 predicted a planner-then-executor advantage
on file-reading tasks and is falsified: one supporting cell in ten under the primary slice, none under the
robust slice. The two interpretive caveats in Section 4.2.2, a Haiku floor on document handling and a
Gemini/GPT-5 ceiling on the subset, bound what the falsification means. The honest conclusion is narrower
than the hypothesis: on this dataset, with a document subset of sixteen sample_ids, the only supporting cell
does not survive the robust check, and a fair re-test requires a larger file-task pool and models positioned
between floor and ceiling on it.
Implications for evaluation methodology. Taken together, the results argue that single-scaffold capabil-
ity numbers are scaffold-conditional point estimates, not model properties. The interaction structure ob-
served here (scaffold effects that vary by model, invert across difficulty levels, and respond differently across
providers) makes a single-cell comparison between two models under two different scaffolds close to unin-
terpretable as a model comparison. Cost sharpens the point into a procurement decision: Gemini s3 is
the cheapest cell at both levels and the most accurate at L2 under all three slices, the within-Anthropic
cost dispersion at L2 makes the scaffold choice a budget decision as much as an accuracy decision, and
an evaluator with a fixed budget who picks a poor scaffold measures less capability while paying more per
unit of measured capability. The actionable version is cheap: running even one alternative scaffold over a
benchmark exposes whether the headline number is scaffold-fragile, and fragility is largest precisely where
the stakes are highest, on capable models attempting hard tasks.
6 Limitations
Tool-surface confound in s1 contrasts. S1 ran as the unmodified inspect_evals solver, whose tool surface
differs from S2 and S3: a stateful web_browser in place of web_search, and no text editor (Section 3.3).
Contrasts involving s1, including the H3 test, therefore measure loop structure and tool surface jointly; the
s2-versus-s3 contrast is the clean structural comparison.
Log-derived cost versus billed cost. Every cost figure in this paper is log-derived: token counts reported in
the Inspect log multiplied by published per-token rates. Four sources of drift separate it from the invoice.
Debug and pilot runs hit the bill but are absent from the validation corpus; provider-side hosted tool
execution (Anthropic’s web_fetch, Gemini’s google_search grounding) does not always surface in the per-
attempt usage fields; cache-read and cache-write accounting conventions are provider-specific and not always
aligned with billing; and input-rejected requests (the provider_serialization_bug, PDF page-limit, and
prompt_too_long patterns) may appear on the bill while the log records them as zero-token errors. These
drifts are partially offsetting and we did not reconcile them quantitatively. The cost-per-correct headline
(Section 4.4) should be read as a directional indicator of comparative cost efficiency, not a procurement
quote.
Provider-side errors and the SDK patch. A provider-side incident affected the Anthropic family for the
full validation run: Anthropic’s API returned a web_fetch_tool_result.error_code value the published
SDK could not deserialize, producing an HTTP 400 on the affected request (patch in Appendix B). The
patch, applied for attempt 3, eliminated the deserialization failure but not the provider’s underlying return
value, and 314 records persisted. Affected requests consumed input tokens before erroring, contributing cost
without contributing to the success denominator, with impact concentrated on Opus and Sonnet s2/s3 at
L2 (Appendix P); Gemini and GPT-5 were unaffected. Our analytic response is the robust slice, reported
alongside primary throughout. Where it changes the interpretation we note it: the L2 robust scaffold gap ex-
pands the within-Anthropic Sonnet and Opus gaps substantially (Section 4.1.3) and similarly compresses the
11

cost-per-correct gap (Section 4.4). Readers should treat primary-slice Anthropic L2 numbers as conservative
on accuracy and inflated on cost, with the robust slice as the corrected reading.
Credit-exhaustion exclusions. Credit exhaustion mid-flight on the Anthropic family during attempts 2 and 3
terminated dispatch on a subset of units before the provider returned a result; the 156 quarantined .eval files
and resume-sweep mechanics are documented in Appendix D. The handling is conservative: a dispatch-time
rejection never reaches the model, so quarantined records carried no usage and hence no cost or behavioral
signal, and their removal does not bias any per-cell statistic. The asymmetry it creates is in retry budget,
not the analysis pool: cross-provider models received an honest retry at any failed dispatch, while Anthropic
failures from credit exhaustion onward received none, so Anthropic terminal-failure counts at attempts 2 and
3 were not re-tried under matched resource conditions. The analyses operate on units rather than retries, so
this does not directly enter the headline statistics; the recovery-from-failure analysis treats each attempt as
an independent observation, the conservative reading.
Extended-thinking token retention. Reasoning was disabled at the model configuration level for every cell
(Section 3.4), so the analysis intentionally excludes extended-thinking signal; the run’s logging configura-
tion, however, also did not retain incidental thinking output. This surfaced during content-filter inspection
(Appendix D): a blocked response’s trace contains pre-block tool calls and completed messages but not the
in-progress reasoning, so the trigger of a block cannot be identified from the trace. The implication for the
present analysis is narrow, since the 28 content-filter records do not affect the scaffold, cost, or behavioral
analyses. The implication for follow-up work is larger: any analysis of reasoning patterns under scaffold
variation requires thinking-stream retention, which the logging configuration of this run did not provide.
Validation-set contamination risk for L1. GAIA’s validation set is public; the test set is held out behind
a leaderboard submission. The high L1 accuracies here (top cells at 84% to 85%) may partially reflect
memorization rather than capability. One indirect control: if L1 were dominated by memorization, accuracy
should track training compute rather than scaffold variation, yet the scaffold gap is similar at both levels
for most models (Section 4.1.3), suggesting scaffolds exert real variation at L1. The concern attaches more
strongly to the L1 cost-per-correct rankings than to the scaffold-effect findings, since a memorization-inflated
accuracy denominator would underestimate true cost.
7 Conclusion and future work
This study executed a pre-registered controlled comparison of three agent scaffolds across five models on
GAIA Levels 1 and 2, holding tasks and conditions fixed. H1 is supported: scaffold variation produces
gaps exceeding the 10 percentage-point threshold, with the largest within-model spread at 28 points (Opus
L2, robust slice). H2 is rejected in direction: scaffold effects vary significantly by model in every slice,
but the most capable Anthropic model gains the most from structured scaffolds at the harder level. H3 is
conditionally supported: the multi-agent scaffold outperforms ReAct at L2 within the Anthropic family but
not for the cross-provider models. H4 is falsified: the planner-then-executor advantage on file-reading tasks
does not survive the robust check in any cell. Beyond the hypothesis tests, structured scaffolds make fewer
tool calls, finish faster, and recover more often from mid-trajectory errors at L2; Gemini s3 is the cheapest
cell at both levels and the most accurate at L2 under all three slices.
The central result for evaluation methodology: the elicitation gap named by Kwa et al. (2026) is large,
measurable under controlled conditions, and not guaranteed to shrink as models improve. Capability num-
bers produced under a single scaffold are scaffold-conditional estimates, and comparisons across differently-
scaffolded evaluations confound model capability with agent-loop fit.
Three extensions follow directly: held-out test-set submission, one run per (model, scaffold) cell against the
GAIA leaderboard, as a contamination-free check on the L1 findings (Section 6); a logging configuration that
retains reasoning tokens, enabling analysis of in-trajectory adaptation under scaffold variation (Section 6);
and, from the family-conditional H3 result and the falsified H4, a wider model panel to test whether the
multi-agent advantage tracks provider boundaries, and a larger file-task pool with models between floor and
ceiling for a fair planner-executor re-test.
12

References
Peter Barnett and Lisa Thiergart. What ai evaluations for preventing catastrophic risks can and cannot do,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08653.
David Gringras. Safety under scaffolding: How evaluation conditions shape measured safety, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.10044.
David Gringras and Misha Salahshoor. Frontier lag: A bibliometric audit of capability misrepresentation in
academic ai evaluation, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.04135.
Sayash Kapoor, Peter Kirgis, Andrew Schwartz, Stephan Rabanser, J. J. Allaire, Rishi Bommasani, Harry
Coppock, Magda Dubois, Gillian K Hadfield, Andrew B. Hall, Sara Hooker, Seth Lazar, Steve Newman,
Dimitris Papailiopoulos, Shoshannah Tekofsky, Helen Toner, Cozmin Ududec, and Arvind Narayanan.
Open-world evaluations for measuring frontier ai capabilities, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.
20520.
Thomas Kwa, Ben West, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia, Max Hasin, Sami Jawhar, Megan
Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney Von Arx, Ryan Bloom, Thomas Broadley, Haoxing Du, Brian Goodrich,
Nikola Jurkovic, Luke Harold Miles, Seraphina Nix, Tao Lin, Neev Parikh, David Rein, Lucas Jun Koba
Sato, Hjalmar Wijk, Daniel M. Ziegler, Elizabeth Barnes, and Lawrence Chan. Measuring ai ability to
complete long software tasks. 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14499.
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen
Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen,
Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. Agentbench: Evaluating
llms as agents. 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03688.
Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Craig Swift, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia:
a benchmark for general ai assistants. 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12983.
Franck Ndzomga. Efficient benchmarking of ai agents, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.23749.
Govind Pimpale, Axel Højmark, Jérémy Scheurer, and Marius Hobbhahn. Forecasting frontier language
model agent capabilities, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.15850.
Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally can be
more effective than scaling model parameters. 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03314.
Jason Starace. How much does scaffold choice change measured capability? a pre-registered controlled
comparison on gaia, May 2026. URL https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/SP576. Pre-registration. Open
Science Framework.
UK AI Security Institute. Inspect: A framework for large language model evaluations, 2024a. URL
https://inspect.aisi.org.uk/. Open-source Python framework. Source: https://github.com/
UKGovernmentBEIS/inspect_ai.
UK AI Security Institute. Inspect evals: A repository of community contributed llm evaluations for inspect
ai, 2024b. URL https://github.com/UKGovernmentBEIS/inspect_evals. Open-source Python package
providing reference implementations of LLM evaluations, including GAIA.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React:
Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629.
13

A Inspect AI Gemini provider patch
When using Gemini 3 Pro with both Gemini’s native web_search (which resolves to google_search)
and function tools (bash, python, text_editor), Inspect AI 0.3.217 raised a pre-flight ValueError read-
ing "Gemini does not yet support native web search or code execution concurrently with other tools."
The underlying API limitation was lifted by Google in March 2026 with the Gemini 3 series via the
include_server_side_tool_invocations flag; as of Inspect 0.3.219, support for the flag had not been
added.
Two edits to inspect_ai/model/_providers/google.py resolve this.
A.1 Edit 1: ToolConfig with the flag
In the generate method of GoogleGenAIAPI (around line 316), construct a ToolConfig with
include_server_side_tool_invocations=True when both native and function tools are present.
Before:
gemini_tool_config = (
chat_tool_config(tool_choice)
if not has_native_tools and len(tools) > 0
else None
)
After:
if not has_native_tools and len(tools) > 0:
gemini_tool_config = chat_tool_config(tool_choice)
elif has_native_tools and len(tools) > 0:
from google.genai.types import ToolConfig
gemini_tool_config = ToolConfig(
include_server_side_tool_invocations=True
)
else:
gemini_tool_config = None
A.2 Edit 2: Remove the pre-flight ValueError
In the chat_tools method (around line 891), remove the pre-flight guard and append function declarations
alongside native tools.
Before:
if google_search or code_execution:
if function_declarations:
raise ValueError(
"Gemini does not yet support native web search "
"or code execution concurrently with other tools."
)
native_tools: ToolListUnion = []
if google_search:
native_tools.append(Tool(google_search=google_search))
if code_execution:
native_tools.append(Tool(code_execution=code_execution))
return (True, native_tools)
14

After:
if google_search or code_execution:
native_tools: ToolListUnion = []
if google_search:
native_tools.append(Tool(google_search=google_search))
if code_execution:
native_tools.append(Tool(code_execution=code_execution))
if function_declarations:
native_tools.append(
Tool(function_declarations=function_declarations)
)
return (True, native_tools)
A.3 Verification
The patch was verified by running Gemini 3.1 Pro on GAIA L1 sample
8e867cd7-cff9-4e6c-867a-ff5ddc2550be with web_search + bash + python + text_editor active;
pre-patch the run errored, post-patch it ran to completion and scored accuracy 1.000.
A.4 Durability
The patch is an environment workaround, not a contribution to Inspect. It survives pip install
–upgrade google-genai, normal venv use, and IDE restarts. It is overwritten by pip install –upgrade
inspect-ai, force-reinstalls, or venv recreation, and must be re-applied after any such operation. The
patched provider file is included in the project repository
3
.
B Anthropic SDK patch for web_fetch_tool_result error code
Midway through the validation run, Anthropic’s API began returning a web_fetch_tool_result structure
whose error_code field held the value "url_not_in_prior_context". This value is not in the published
Anthropic Python SDK’s Literal alias for that field, so the SDK’s Pydantic model raised a validation error
during deserialization. Because the conversation continued and the now-malformed structure was echoed
back to Anthropic on the subsequent request, the API responded with an HTTP 400, terminating the
attempt. The pattern affected the Anthropic family at attempt-3 cells where Inspect’s compaction handler
had removed earlier URL-bearing tool calls from context (Appendix P).
Two edits to the Anthropic Python SDK accept the unmapped value and let the SDK deserialize the response
cleanly. The patch does not suppress the underlying error: the model still surfaces the web_fetch failure
as a normal tool error. The patch simply prevents that error from cascading into a Pydantic crash and a
subsequent HTTP 400 on the next request.
B.1 Edit 1: Stable types
In anthropic/types/web_fetch_tool_result_error_code.py, extend the Literal alias to include the
new value.
Before:
WebFetchToolResultErrorCode: TypeAlias = Literal[
"invalid_tool_input",
3
Anonymized repository: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/gaia-scaffold-comparison-ECBF/
15

"url_too_long",
"url_not_allowed",
"url_not_accessible",
"unsupported_content_type",
"too_many_requests",
"max_uses_exceeded",
"unavailable",
]
After:
WebFetchToolResultErrorCode: TypeAlias = Literal[
"invalid_tool_input",
"url_too_long",
"url_not_allowed",
"url_not_accessible",
"unsupported_content_type",
"too_many_requests",
"max_uses_exceeded",
"unavailable",
"url_not_in_prior_context",
]
B.2 Edit 2: Beta types
The same change is applied to anthropic/types/beta/beta_web_fetch_tool_result_error_code.py.
The beta surface duplicates the stable alias under the BetaWebFetchToolResultErrorCode name; Inspect
routes some Anthropic requests through the beta API surface, so both files must be patched for the fix to
cover every request path through the SDK.
Before:
BetaWebFetchToolResultErrorCode: TypeAlias = Literal[
"invalid_tool_input",
"url_too_long",
"url_not_allowed",
"url_not_accessible",
"unsupported_content_type",
"too_many_requests",
"max_uses_exceeded",
"unavailable",
]
After:
BetaWebFetchToolResultErrorCode: TypeAlias = Literal[
"invalid_tool_input",
"url_too_long",
"url_not_allowed",
"url_not_accessible",
"unsupported_content_type",
"too_many_requests",
"max_uses_exceeded",
16

"unavailable",
"url_not_in_prior_context",
]
B.3 Verification
The patch was verified during the investigation that produced it. Four samples from the original attempt 2
bloat cohort which had terminated with the Pydantic validation error were re-run with the patch in place.
Pre-patch, all four terminated on the SDK-side deserialization error followed by an HTTP 400 on the next
request. Post-patch, the SDK accepted the response, the web_fetch error surfaced to the agent loop as a
normal tool error, and the attempts either continued or terminated with a clean error in the trace. The
patch was then applied for attempt 3 of the full validation run; the 314 records that nonetheless ended
up flagged with provider_serialization_bug (Appendix P) are records where Anthropic’s API returned
the unmapped value but the patched SDK accepted it and the agent loop subsequently terminated on the
surfaced tool error, rather than crashing on deserialization.
B.4 Durability
The patch is an environment workaround, not a contribution to the Anthropic SDK. It survives nor-
mal venv use and IDE restarts. It is overwritten by pip install –upgrade anthropic, pip install
–force-reinstall anthropic, or venv recreation, and must be re-applied after any such operation. The
patched SDK files are included in the project repository
4
.
C Scaffold prompts
This appendix contains the full role and phase prompts for the S2 (PAR) and S3 (Planner-then-Executor)
scaffolds. S1 (ReAct) uses the default inspect_evals GAIA prompt and is not reproduced here.
C.1 S2: Planner-Actor-Rater (PAR)
Planner prompt:
You are the Advisor. Read the question and any prior actor and rater turns in the con-
versation. Produce a short bulleted plan of next steps for the Actor to execute. Do not
attempt to solve the task yourself. Do not produce an answer. Do not call tools. If a prior
plan exists and the rater said CONTINUE, revise the plan based on the rater’s feedback
and what the actor has already tried.
Actor prompt:
You are the Actor. You will find the answer to the question following the most recent
bulleted plan. You will disregard any comments beginning with CONTINUE. Note any
prior steps that successfully gathered information; build on them rather than redoing them.
Do not repeat actions that previously failed. You have access to (bash, python, web_search,
text_editor, submit_answer) use them as you see fit to find the answer, when you have your
final answer you must use submit_answer. Your answer will be in the format provided in
the original question. Do not use markdown formatting (bold, italics, code blocks, bullet
points), do not prefix with "Answer:" or similar labels, do not add explanation. Return only
the bare value matching the format specified in the question.
Rater prompt:
4
Anonymized repository: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/gaia-scaffold-comparison-ECBF/
17

You are an evaluator. Review the most recent answer. Decide whether it correctly addresses
the question and matches the format required. Call submit_verdict with done=True if
the answer is correct and well-formatted, or done=False if more work is needed. When
done=False, include a short reason explaining what is wrong.
C.2 S3: Planner-then-Executor
Planner prompt:
You are the planner, your job is to evaluate the question you receive and create a detailed
bulleted plan for the executor. You will restate the format requirements from the question
so the executor does not miss them. You do not have tools, do not execute the plan, and
do not answer the question. You will only provide the plan.
Executor prompt:
You are the executor. You will receive a detailed plan from the planner. You will follow
this plan to find an answer to the provided question. Your response will be in the format
provided in the question. Return only the bare value matching the format specified in the
question.
D Incomplete cells and failure analysis
Five failure modes account for every non-completed attempt-unit in the validation run. First, two Anthropic
credit-exhaustion events produced 1,446 provider-rejected dispatches with zero tokens and zero working time,
quarantined in 156 .eval files before analysis; the affected cells received clean retries in the resume sweep.
The counts are from the pre-cleaning logs; the released log tree is the post-quarantine state. Second, 314
records carry the provider_serialization_bug flag: Anthropic’s API returned a web_fetch_tool_result
error code the published SDK could not deserialize (Appendix B); none received a clean retry, motivating
the robust slice. Per-cell concentrations are in Appendix P. Third, 39 records (33 unique units) terminated
with a prompt is too long error, 27 of 33 in Haiku s2 and recurring on a small set of GAIA questions,
indicating systematic context pressure rather than stochastic variation; retry threading is in Appendix Q.
Fourth, 28 records terminated on a provider content filter, corresponding to two underlying GAIA questions
(Appendix R); the logging limitation this surfaced is discussed in Section 6. Fifth, ten records terminated
on provider-side input rejections independent of scaffold or capability: nine on the Anthropic 100-PDF-page
limit and one on a null-byte read failure.
Of the 30 (model, scaffold, level) cells in the validation design, 15 completed every attempt-unit and 15
are partial. All partial cells belong to the Anthropic family; every Gemini and GPT-5 cell completed at
100%. Table 1 lists each partial cell with its completion rate and the per-bucket breakdown of errored
units using the failure buckets defined above. Bucket counts sum exactly to the errored-unit count in every
row. Credit-exhausted dispatches do not appear here. Two Anthropic credit-exhaustion events during the
validation run (a partial drain at the end of attempt 2 affecting Opus, and a complete drain of all Anthropic
attempt 3 cells before credits were reloaded) produced 1,446 sample-level API rejections across 21 (model,
scaffold, attempt, level) cells. The rejections concentrate in 156 .eval files in which every contained sample
matched the same provider response (credit balance is too low); no .eval file mixed valid completions
with credit-exhausted samples. All 156 files were quarantined before any downstream computation, and the
May 24 resume sweep produced clean retries for the affected cells, so the cells are not lost to the analysis,
only the rejected dispatches. Across all 30 cells, 5,907 of the 6,255 designed attempt-units completed without
an Inspect-level error.
E Full per-cell outcomes
Table 2 reports per-cell outcomes for all five models: attempt counts, completion rate, the failure-mode
bucket counts that decompose the difference between n_att and correct, and both accuracy definitions
18

Table 1: Partial cells (completion rate below 1.00) with errored-unit counts by failure bucket. n_att is
designed attempt-units (159 at L1, 258 at L2); n_comp is units completing without an Inspect-level error;
n_err is n_att minus n_comp. Bucket abbreviations: ptl = prompt_too_long, cf = content filter, pdf =
PDF page-limit, psb = provider_serialization_bug.
model scaffold level n_att n_comp n_err comp. rate ptl cf pdf psb
haiku s2 L1 159 150 9 94.3% 1 0 0 8
haiku s3 L1 159 154 5 96.9% 0 0 0 5
opus s2 L1 159 150 9 94.3% 0 0 0 9
opus s3 L1 159 134 25 84.3% 0 0 0 25
sonnet s1 L1 159 158 1 99.4% 0 1 0 0
sonnet s2 L1 159 147 12 92.5% 0 0 0 12
sonnet s3 L1 159 145 14 91.2% 0 1 0 13
haiku s1 L2 258 257 1 99.6% 0 1 0 0
haiku s2 L2 258 208 50 80.6% 5 0 4 41
haiku s3 L2 258 228 30 88.4% 4 3 2 21
opus s1 L2 258 257 1 99.6% 0 1 0 0
opus s2 L2 258 212 46 82.2% 1 2 0 43
opus s3 L2 258 205 53 79.5% 0 0 0 53
sonnet s2 L2 258 212 46 82.2% 0 3 0 43
sonnet s3 L2 258 212 46 82.2% 2 3 0 41
used in Section 4.1.1. Every attempt-unit falls into exactly one bucket: correct (completed and scored as
correct by the GAIA scorer), wrong (completed and scored as incorrect, including time-limit truncations
that submitted no answer), p2l (terminated with a prompt is too long provider error, Appendix D), cf
(terminated with a content-filter block, Appendix D), pdf (terminated with the Anthropic 100-PDF-page
limit, Appendix D), bug (carried the provider_serialization_bug flag, Appendix D), and other (any
other Inspect-level error not matching the above signatures). Bucket counts sum to n_att on every row,
providing a complete accounting of where every dispatched attempt ended up.
19

Table 2: Full per-cell outcomes for the validation run. Rows are sorted by (level, model, scaffold). No
attempt-unit terminated in the other bucket, so the column is omitted. comp. rate is the fraction of
attempt-units that did not terminate with an Inspect-level error; acc. overall divides correct by n_att; acc.
comp. divides correct by the non-errored count.
level model scaffold n_att comp. rate correct wrong p2l cf pdf bug acc. overall acc. comp.
L1 haiku s1 159 1.00 73 86 0 0 0 0 0.459 0.459
L1 haiku s2 159 0.94 73 77 1 0 0 8 0.459 0.487
L1 haiku s3 159 0.97 36 118 0 0 0 5 0.226 0.234
L1 sonnet s1 159 0.99 105 53 0 1 0 0 0.660 0.665
L1 sonnet s2 159 0.92 116 31 0 0 0 12 0.730 0.789
L1 sonnet s3 159 0.91 116 29 0 1 0 13 0.730 0.800
L1 opus s1 159 1.00 132 27 0 0 0 0 0.830 0.830
L1 opus s2 159 0.94 121 29 0 0 0 9 0.761 0.807
L1 opus s3 159 0.84 112 22 0 0 0 25 0.704 0.836
L1 gemini-3.1-pro s1 159 1.00 125 34 0 0 0 0 0.786 0.786
L1 gemini-3.1-pro s2 159 1.00 132 27 0 0 0 0 0.830 0.830
L1 gemini-3.1-pro s3 159 1.00 134 25 0 0 0 0 0.843 0.843
L1 gpt-5 s1 159 1.00 129 30 0 0 0 0 0.811 0.811
L1 gpt-5 s2 159 1.00 134 25 0 0 0 0 0.843 0.843
L1 gpt-5 s3 159 1.00 135 24 0 0 0 0 0.849 0.849
L2 haiku s1 258 1.00 81 176 0 1 0 0 0.314 0.315
L2 haiku s2 258 0.81 110 98 5 0 4 41 0.426 0.529
L2 haiku s3 258 0.88 58 170 4 3 2 21 0.225 0.254
L2 sonnet s1 258 1.00 135 123 0 0 0 0 0.523 0.523
L2 sonnet s2 258 0.82 160 52 0 3 0 43 0.620 0.755
L2 sonnet s3 258 0.82 154 58 2 3 0 41 0.597 0.726
L2 opus s1 258 1.00 144 113 0 1 0 0 0.558 0.560
L2 opus s2 258 0.82 180 32 1 2 0 43 0.698 0.849
L2 opus s3 258 0.79 169 36 0 0 0 53 0.655 0.824
L2 gemini-3.1-pro s1 258 1.00 179 79 0 0 0 0 0.694 0.694
L2 gemini-3.1-pro s2 258 1.00 194 64 0 0 0 0 0.752 0.752
L2 gemini-3.1-pro s3 258 1.00 222 36 0 0 0 0 0.860 0.860
L2 gpt-5 s1 258 1.00 197 61 0 0 0 0 0.764 0.764
L2 gpt-5 s2 258 1.00 201 57 0 0 0 0 0.779 0.779
L2 gpt-5 s3 258 1.00 212 46 0 0 0 0 0.822 0.822
F Full bootstrap accuracy
Table 3 reports the bootstrap accuracy point estimate and 95% CI for every (model, scaffold, level) cell across
the primary, robust (no flag), and intersection slices. The same data is visualized in Figure 3. Each CI is
computed from 5,000 sample_id-clustered bootstrap resamples with seed 20260526. The same seed is used
across the three slices so resample draws are identical at the level of sample_id picks; differences between
slices reflect only the input pool. The cluster count per cell is 53 sample_ids at Level 1 and 86 at Level 2
in the primary slice; the intersection slice retains 52 of 53 L1 sample_ids and 80 of 86 L2 sample_ids, while
the robust slice retains all sample_ids but drops attempt-units carrying the provider_serialization_bug
flag.
20

Figure 3: Per-cell accuracy with 95% bootstrap CIs, by slice (rows) and GAIA level (columns); within each
panel, one dot per scaffold.
21

Table 3: Full bootstrap accuracy for the validation run. Rows are sorted by (level, model, scaffold). Each cell
reports point accuracy and the 95% bootstrap CI. The primary slice includes all attempt-units; the robust
(no flag) slice excludes units carrying the provider_serialization_bug flag; the intersection slice retains
only sample_ids that completed in every (model, scaffold) cell at the corresponding level.
level model scaffold primary [95% CI] robust [95% CI] intersection [95% CI]
L1 haiku s1 0.459 [0.358, 0.553] 0.459 [0.358, 0.560] 0.468 [0.372, 0.564]
L1 haiku s2 0.459 [0.365, 0.560] 0.483 [0.383, 0.583] 0.462 [0.365, 0.558]
L1 haiku s3 0.226 [0.151, 0.308] 0.234 [0.156, 0.318] 0.231 [0.154, 0.314]
L1 sonnet s1 0.660 [0.553, 0.761] 0.660 [0.553, 0.761] 0.667 [0.558, 0.769]
L1 sonnet s2 0.730 [0.629, 0.824] 0.789 [0.692, 0.877] 0.737 [0.635, 0.827]
L1 sonnet s3 0.730 [0.629, 0.824] 0.795 [0.699, 0.882] 0.744 [0.647, 0.833]
L1 opus s1 0.830 [0.730, 0.918] 0.830 [0.736, 0.918] 0.827 [0.724, 0.917]
L1 opus s2 0.761 [0.660, 0.849] 0.807 [0.708, 0.898] 0.763 [0.660, 0.853]
L1 opus s3 0.704 [0.604, 0.799] 0.836 [0.736, 0.924] 0.712 [0.609, 0.808]
L1 gemini-3.1-pro s1 0.786 [0.686, 0.881] 0.786 [0.686, 0.881] 0.782 [0.679, 0.878]
L1 gemini-3.1-pro s2 0.830 [0.748, 0.906] 0.830 [0.748, 0.906] 0.827 [0.737, 0.904]
L1 gemini-3.1-pro s3 0.843 [0.755, 0.918] 0.843 [0.755, 0.918] 0.846 [0.756, 0.923]
L1 gpt-5 s1 0.811 [0.730, 0.887] 0.811 [0.730, 0.887] 0.808 [0.724, 0.885]
L1 gpt-5 s2 0.843 [0.748, 0.925] 0.843 [0.748, 0.925] 0.859 [0.776, 0.930]
L1 gpt-5 s3 0.849 [0.767, 0.925] 0.849 [0.767, 0.925] 0.859 [0.776, 0.929]
L2 haiku s1 0.314 [0.240, 0.391] 0.314 [0.240, 0.391] 0.321 [0.242, 0.400]
L2 haiku s2 0.426 [0.345, 0.508] 0.507 [0.417, 0.596] 0.446 [0.367, 0.533]
L2 haiku s3 0.225 [0.159, 0.291] 0.245 [0.176, 0.316] 0.225 [0.158, 0.296]
L2 sonnet s1 0.523 [0.426, 0.616] 0.523 [0.426, 0.616] 0.537 [0.442, 0.637]
L2 sonnet s2 0.620 [0.535, 0.698] 0.744 [0.651, 0.827] 0.646 [0.562, 0.729]
L2 sonnet s3 0.597 [0.516, 0.678] 0.710 [0.621, 0.794] 0.617 [0.537, 0.700]
L2 opus s1 0.558 [0.477, 0.636] 0.558 [0.477, 0.636] 0.583 [0.500, 0.662]
L2 opus s2 0.698 [0.616, 0.775] 0.837 [0.759, 0.907] 0.721 [0.633, 0.804]
L2 opus s3 0.655 [0.570, 0.736] 0.824 [0.738, 0.900] 0.679 [0.592, 0.762]
L2 gemini-3.1-pro s1 0.694 [0.605, 0.779] 0.694 [0.605, 0.779] 0.704 [0.613, 0.796]
L2 gemini-3.1-pro s2 0.752 [0.671, 0.829] 0.752 [0.671, 0.829] 0.746 [0.662, 0.825]
L2 gemini-3.1-pro s3 0.860 [0.791, 0.922] 0.860 [0.791, 0.922] 0.854 [0.783, 0.917]
L2 gpt-5 s1 0.764 [0.682, 0.841] 0.764 [0.682, 0.841] 0.775 [0.692, 0.854]
L2 gpt-5 s2 0.779 [0.702, 0.853] 0.779 [0.702, 0.849] 0.783 [0.704, 0.854]
L2 gpt-5 s3 0.822 [0.744, 0.891] 0.822 [0.744, 0.891] 0.825 [0.750, 0.892]
G Full scaffold gap
Table 4 reports the per-(model, level) scaffold gap (max minus min accuracy across the three scaffolds)
under the three slices, including which scaffold is at the max and min for each slice. The gap point estimate
and 95% CI come from 5,000 sample_id-clustered bootstrap resamples shared across scaffolds within each
(model, level) iteration. The same data is visualized in Figure 1 in the body. Cases where the robust or
intersection slice flips which scaffold sits at the max or min are visible by comparing the parenthesized pairs
across columns within a row: the L1 opus row, for example, shows (s1, s3) under primary but (s3, s2) under
robust, reflecting that removing flagged units changes which scaffold has the highest and lowest accuracy.
22

Table 4: Full scaffold gap for the validation run. Each non-key column reports the gap point estimate and
95% bootstrap CI followed in parentheses by the scaffold at the max and the scaffold at the min for that
slice.
level model primary robust (no flag) intersection
L1 haiku 0.233 [0.157, 0.358] (s1, s3) 0.250 [0.168, 0.363] (s2, s3) 0.237 [0.154, 0.359] (s1, s3)
L1 sonnet 0.069 [0.013, 0.182] (s2, s1) 0.134 [0.056, 0.244] (s3, s1) 0.077 [0.019, 0.186] (s3, s1)
L1 opus 0.126 [0.038, 0.226] (s1, s3) 0.029 [0.010, 0.102] (s3, s2) 0.115 [0.032, 0.218] (s1, s3)
L1 gemini-3.1-pro 0.057 [0.013, 0.157] (s3, s1) 0.057 [0.013, 0.157] (s3, s1) 0.064 [0.019, 0.167] (s3, s1)
L1 gpt-5 0.038 [0.013, 0.119] (s3, s1) 0.038 [0.013, 0.119] (s3, s1) 0.051 [0.013, 0.128] (s2, s1)
L2 haiku 0.202 [0.120, 0.287] (s2, s3) 0.262 [0.174, 0.358] (s2, s3) 0.221 [0.142, 0.304] (s2, s3)
L2 sonnet 0.097 [0.023, 0.198] (s2, s1) 0.221 [0.126, 0.332] (s2, s1) 0.108 [0.029, 0.208] (s2, s1)
L2 opus 0.140 [0.066, 0.221] (s2, s1) 0.279 [0.213, 0.357] (s2, s1) 0.137 [0.062, 0.225] (s2, s1)
L2 gemini-3.1-pro 0.167 [0.097, 0.240] (s3, s1) 0.167 [0.097, 0.240] (s3, s1) 0.150 [0.079, 0.225] (s3, s1)
L2 gpt-5 0.058 [0.019, 0.132] (s3, s1) 0.058 [0.019, 0.132] (s3, s1) 0.050 [0.017, 0.129] (s3, s1)
H Pairwise scaffold differences
Table 5 reports pairwise scaffold-accuracy differences (e.g., s1-s2 is accuracy on s1 minus accuracy on
s2) for each (model, level), across the three slices. Three pairs per cell are computed: s1-s2, s1-s3,
and s2-s3. Differences are reported with their 95% bootstrap CIs computed from the same sample_id-
clustered resamples that produced the headline gap in Appendix G; the resamples are shared across scaffolds
within each iteration so the pairwise-difference CI accounts for the within-question dependence across scaffold
conditions. A CI excluding zero indicates that the two scaffolds produce statistically distinguishable accuracy
on the slice; a CI spanning zero indicates the scaffolds are not distinguishable at the 95% level. Signs are
preserved (positive means the first-named scaffold scored higher; negative means the second scored higher)
so the direction of any individual pair is unambiguous.
23

Table 5: Pairwise scaffold differences with 95% bootstrap CIs for the validation run. Each row reports one
(model, level, pair); the three columns at right give the point difference and 95% CI under the primary,
robust (no flag), and intersection slices. Positive values indicate the first scaffold of the pair scored higher
than the second on that slice.
level model pair primary [95% CI] robust [95% CI] intersection [95% CI]
L1 haiku s1-s2 +0.000 [-0.113, +0.119] -0.024 [-0.142, +0.097] +0.006 [-0.109, +0.122]
L1 haiku s1-s3 +0.233 [+0.113, +0.352] +0.225 [+0.108, +0.345] +0.237 [+0.115, +0.359]
L1 haiku s2-s3 +0.233 [+0.138, +0.327] +0.250 [+0.151, +0.351] +0.231 [+0.135, +0.327]
L1 sonnet s1-s2 -0.069 [-0.176, +0.031] -0.129 [-0.232, -0.030] -0.071 [-0.173, +0.032]
L1 sonnet s1-s3 -0.069 [-0.176, +0.031] -0.134 [-0.232, -0.041] -0.077 [-0.179, +0.026]
L1 sonnet s2-s3 +0.000 [-0.069, +0.063] -0.005 [-0.078, +0.064] -0.006 [-0.077, +0.058]
L1 opus s1-s2 +0.069 [-0.013, +0.145] +0.024 [-0.048, +0.095] +0.064 [-0.013, +0.147]
L1 opus s1-s3 +0.126 [+0.031, +0.226] -0.006 [-0.080, +0.069] +0.115 [+0.019, +0.218]
L1 opus s2-s3 +0.057 [-0.006, +0.126] -0.029 [-0.079, +0.017] +0.051 [-0.013, +0.122]
L1 gemini-3.1-pro s1-s2 -0.044 [-0.138, +0.044] -0.044 [-0.138, +0.044] -0.045 [-0.141, +0.045]
L1 gemini-3.1-pro s1-s3 -0.057 [-0.151, +0.031] -0.057 [-0.151, +0.031] -0.064 [-0.154, +0.026]
L1 gemini-3.1-pro s2-s3 -0.013 [-0.107, +0.075] -0.013 [-0.107, +0.075] -0.019 [-0.109, +0.071]
L1 gpt-5 s1-s2 -0.031 [-0.113, +0.050] -0.031 [-0.113, +0.050] -0.051 [-0.128, +0.019]
L1 gpt-5 s1-s3 -0.038 [-0.094, +0.019] -0.038 [-0.094, +0.019] -0.051 [-0.103, +0.000]
L1 gpt-5 s2-s3 -0.006 [-0.063, +0.057] -0.006 [-0.063, +0.057] +0.000 [-0.051, +0.058]
L2 haiku s1-s2 -0.112 [-0.202, -0.023] -0.193 [-0.286, -0.103] -0.125 [-0.217, -0.033]
L2 haiku s1-s3 +0.089 [-0.004, +0.178] +0.069 [-0.026, +0.161] +0.096 [+0.000, +0.192]
L2 haiku s2-s3 +0.202 [+0.116, +0.287] +0.262 [+0.168, +0.358] +0.221 [+0.138, +0.304]
L2 sonnet s1-s2 -0.097 [-0.198, +0.004] -0.221 [-0.331, -0.111] -0.108 [-0.208, -0.004]
L2 sonnet s1-s3 -0.074 [-0.167, +0.019] -0.186 [-0.284, -0.093] -0.079 [-0.175, +0.012]
L2 sonnet s2-s3 +0.023 [-0.047, +0.097] +0.035 [-0.043, +0.116] +0.029 [-0.046, +0.104]
L2 opus s1-s2 -0.140 [-0.221, -0.062] -0.279 [-0.352, -0.209] -0.137 [-0.221, -0.054]
L2 opus s1-s3 -0.097 [-0.186, -0.012] -0.266 [-0.348, -0.188] -0.096 [-0.188, -0.004]
L2 opus s2-s3 +0.043 [-0.016, +0.105] +0.013 [-0.035, +0.066] +0.042 [-0.021, +0.108]
L2 gemini-3.1-pro s1-s2 -0.058 [-0.128, +0.012] -0.058 [-0.128, +0.012] -0.042 [-0.108, +0.025]
L2 gemini-3.1-pro s1-s3 -0.167 [-0.240, -0.093] -0.167 [-0.240, -0.093] -0.150 [-0.225, -0.079]
L2 gemini-3.1-pro s2-s3 -0.109 [-0.186, -0.035] -0.109 [-0.186, -0.035] -0.108 [-0.188, -0.033]
L2 gpt-5 s1-s2 -0.016 [-0.093, +0.058] -0.016 [-0.093, +0.058] -0.008 [-0.092, +0.075]
L2 gpt-5 s1-s3 -0.058 [-0.132, +0.016] -0.058 [-0.132, +0.016] -0.050 [-0.129, +0.029]
L2 gpt-5 s2-s3 -0.043 [-0.089, +0.008] -0.043 [-0.089, +0.008] -0.042 [-0.092, +0.008]
I Within-Anthropic tier sensitivity (RQ5)
This appendix reports the full RQ5 analysis: within the Claude 4.x family, does scaffold sensitivity scale
predictably with model tier? The relevant quantity is the scaffold gap for each of Haiku, Sonnet, and Opus at
each level under the three slices defined in Section 4.1, visualized in Figure 1 and tabulated in Appendix G.
With only three tiers, monotonicity is read off directly rather than tested formally.
Under the primary slice, the L1 gap ladder is non-monotonic: Haiku 0.23, Sonnet 0.07, Opus 0.13, with Opus
exceeding Sonnet by 6 percentage points, the opposite direction from the H2 prediction. The L2 primary
ladder follows the same shape (Haiku 0.20, Sonnet 0.10, Opus 0.14). On both levels, Sonnet is the least
scaffold-sensitive Anthropic model, not Opus.
The robust slice tells a different story at each level. On L1 the ladder is cleanly monotonic and decreasing
(0.25, 0.13, 0.03): the H2 prediction holds once the SDK bug is removed, and Opus L1’s 3-point gap is the
smallest of any cell in the experiment. On L2 the robust ladder is flat and large (0.26, 0.22, 0.28): removing
the bug expands all three Anthropic gaps and Opus emerges as the most scaffold-sensitive model. H2 fails
completely at L2 under the robust slice; the most capable Anthropic model is the most scaffold-sensitive
rather than the least.
24

The intersection slice tracks the primary slice closely on both levels (52 of 53 L1 and 80 of 86 L2 sample_ids
retained) and does not change the qualitative reading; numbers are in Appendix G.
Two interpretations of the L2 robust finding deserve attention. The first is that scaffold choice imposes
larger absolute capability variation on more capable Anthropic models at the harder level (Opus L2’s 28-
point within-model spread is the experiment’s largest): elicitation gets more important at the top of the
ladder when the task is hard enough that a poor scaffold leaves capability unused. The second is a ceiling-
effect inversion: at L1 the better models have less room to move, compressing gaps at the top; at L2 they
have more room, expanding them. The current data cannot adjudicate between these. What it can say is
that the H2 prediction is conditionally supported on L1 under the robust slice and conditionally falsified on
L2 under the same slice.
J Full GLMM coefficient tables and fit metadata
This appendix reports the complete output for the pre-registered mixed-effects test of H2 (Section 4.1.4):
fit metadata for the baseline and interaction models under each slice, the likelihood-ratio test summary,
and the full fixed-effect coefficient tables. All models are binomial GLMMs fit via lme4 (glmer) under
the pymer4 wrapper with a random intercept on sample_id. Reference levels are scaffold s1 (ReAct) and
model Opus. The baseline formula is success ~ scaffold + model + level + (1 | sample_id); the
interaction formula adds the scaffold × model interaction. The interaction fits report converged = no
under lme4’s strict gradient criterion; the gradient magnitudes at termination (0.001 to 0.013 across slices,
discussed in Section 4.1.4) are above the strict threshold but within practically converged range, and the fits
are treated as usable for inference.
Table 6: Fit metadata for the baseline and interaction GLMMs under each slice. n_obs is attempt-units
entering the fit; n_ids is distinct sample_ids contributing random intercepts.
slice model n_obs n_ids converged logLik AIC BIC
primary baseline 6255 139 yes -2969.99 5957.98 6018.65
primary interaction 6255 139 no -2928.51 5891.03 6005.63
robust baseline 5941 139 yes -2611.75 5241.49 5301.70
robust interaction 5941 139 no -2550.66 5135.31 5249.04
intersection baseline 5940 132 yes -2807.72 5633.45 5693.65
intersection interaction 5940 132 no -2767.04 5568.07 5681.79
Table 7: Likelihood-ratio test of the no-interaction null against the scaffold × model interaction model, per
slice.
slice χ
2 
df p
primary 82.95 8 < 0.0001
robust 122.18 8 < 0.0001
intersection 81.38 8 < 0.0001
K H4 robustness checks
This appendix reports the full tables for the H4 difference-of-differences analysis (Section 4.2.2). Table 11
is the primary-slice DoD on the document-attachment subset; Table 12 repeats it under the robust slice
(provider_serialization_bug units excluded); Table 13 repeats it under the intersection slice; Table 14
reports the primary-slice DoD under the expanded any-file definition, which adds image, audio, and code
attachments to the document set (n = 11 L1, n = 20 L2 sample_ids). Column definitions and the sup-
port/contradict reading are shared across all four tables.
25

Table 8: Fixed-effect coefficients, baseline (no-interaction) GLMM, all three slices. Reference levels: scaffold
s1, model Opus.
term β SE 95% CI p
Primary slice
(Intercept) 1.701 0.445 ( 0.829, 2.573) < 0.001
scaffold s2 0.404 0.082 ( 0.244, 0.564) < 0.001
scaffold s3 0.156 0.080 (-0.001, 0.314) 0.052
model gemini-3.1-pro 0.756 0.110 ( 0.541, 0.971) < 0.001
model gpt-5 0.910 0.112 ( 0.690, 1.129) < 0.001
model haiku -1.952 0.102 (-2.152, -1.751) < 0.001
model sonnet -0.361 0.100 (-0.557, -0.166) < 0.001
level -0.546 0.259 (-1.052, -0.039) 0.035
Robust slice
(Intercept) 1.932 0.489 ( 0.973, 2.890) < 0.001
scaffold s2 0.762 0.088 ( 0.590, 0.935) < 0.001
scaffold s3 0.526 0.086 ( 0.357, 0.695) < 0.001
model gemini-3.1-pro 0.219 0.119 (-0.015, 0.453) 0.066
model gpt-5 0.379 0.121 ( 0.142, 0.617) 0.002
model haiku -2.520 0.118 (-2.750, -2.289) < 0.001
model sonnet -0.587 0.115 (-0.813, -0.362) < 0.001
level -0.449 0.284 (-1.006, 0.108) 0.114
Intersection slice
(Intercept) 1.722 0.445 ( 0.851, 2.594) < 0.001
scaffold s2 0.410 0.084 ( 0.246, 0.575) < 0.001
scaffold s3 0.145 0.083 (-0.017, 0.307) 0.080
model gemini-3.1-pro 0.634 0.113 ( 0.413, 0.854) < 0.001
model gpt-5 0.855 0.116 ( 0.628, 1.082) < 0.001
model haiku -2.002 0.106 (-2.209, -1.795) < 0.001
model sonnet -0.366 0.103 (-0.569, -0.163) < 0.001
level -0.497 0.260 (-1.006, 0.013) 0.056
Table 9: Fixed-effect coefficients from the scaffold × model interaction GLMM, primary slice. Reference
cell is Opus + s1. Interactions are log-odds relative to the s1+Opus baseline; positive means that scaffold
helps that model more than it helps Opus. 95% Wald CI shown. The robust and intersection slice coefficient
tables follow in Table 10.
term β SE 95% CI p
(Intercept) 1.752 0.461 ( 0.849, 2.655) < 0.001
scaffold s2 0.401 0.179 ( 0.051, 0.751) 0.025
scaffold s3 0.077 0.174 (-0.264, 0.418) 0.659
model gemini-3.1-pro 0.452 0.179 ( 0.101, 0.804) 0.012
model gpt-5 0.861 0.187 ( 0.494, 1.227) < 0.001
model haiku -1.663 0.171 (-1.997, -1.328) < 0.001
model sonnet -0.519 0.169 (-0.851, -0.187) 0.002
level -0.556 0.263 (-1.071, -0.041) 0.035
s2 × gemini-3.1-pro 0.008 0.262 (-0.506, 0.522) 0.975
s3 × gemini-3.1-pro 1.021 0.273 ( 0.487, 1.555) < 0.001
s2 × gpt-5 -0.214 0.270 (-0.743, 0.315) 0.427
s3 × gpt-5 0.384 0.272 (-0.149, 0.917) 0.158
s2 × haiku -0.015 0.242 (-0.489, 0.459) 0.949
s3 × haiku -0.972 0.247 (-1.457, -0.487) < 0.001
s2 × sonnet 0.118 0.246 (-0.364, 0.600) 0.632
s3 × sonnet 0.351 0.242 (-0.124, 0.825) 0.148
26

Table 10: Fixed-effect coefficients, scaffold × model interaction GLMM, robust and intersection slices. The
primary-slice interaction table is Table 9 above. Reference cell: Opus + s1.
term β SE 95% CI p
Robust slice
(Intercept) 1.654 0.509 ( 0.657, 2.651) 0.001
scaffold s2 1.197 0.207 ( 0.790, 1.603) < 0.001
scaffold s3 1.285 0.215 ( 0.864, 1.706) < 0.001
model gemini-3.1-pro 0.476 0.184 ( 0.116, 0.836) 0.010
model gpt-5 0.904 0.191 ( 0.528, 1.279) < 0.001
model haiku -1.760 0.176 (-2.105, -1.415) < 0.001
model sonnet -0.549 0.174 (-0.890, -0.208) 0.002
level -0.466 0.292 (-1.038, 0.106) 0.110
s2 × gemini-3.1-pro -0.768 0.285 (-1.327, -0.210) 0.007
s3 × gemini-3.1-pro -0.138 0.302 (-0.730, 0.453) 0.647
s2 × gpt-5 -1.001 0.293 (-1.574, -0.428) < 0.001
s3 × gpt-5 -0.803 0.302 (-1.395, -0.211) 0.008
s2 × haiku -0.531 0.269 (-1.059, -0.003) 0.049
s3 × haiku -2.129 0.282 (-2.681, -1.577) < 0.001
s2 × sonnet -0.005 0.281 (-0.556, 0.547) 0.987
s3 × sonnet -0.230 0.285 (-0.788, 0.328) 0.419
Intersection slice
(Intercept) 1.774 0.462 ( 0.870, 2.679) < 0.001
scaffold s2 0.399 0.185 ( 0.036, 0.762) 0.031
scaffold s3 0.083 0.181 (-0.271, 0.437) 0.647
model gemini-3.1-pro 0.380 0.185 ( 0.018, 0.743) 0.040
model gpt-5 0.794 0.193 ( 0.416, 1.173) < 0.001
model haiku -1.707 0.175 (-2.051, -1.363) < 0.001
model sonnet -0.552 0.175 (-0.894, -0.209) 0.002
level -0.508 0.264 (-1.027, 0.010) 0.055
s2 × gemini-3.1-pro -0.068 0.270 (-0.597, 0.460) 0.800
s3 × gemini-3.1-pro 0.931 0.280 ( 0.383, 1.479) < 0.001
s2 × gpt-5 -0.177 0.280 (-0.726, 0.371) 0.526
s3 × gpt-5 0.384 0.281 (-0.168, 0.936) 0.172
s2 × haiku 0.004 0.249 (-0.484, 0.492) 0.987
s3 × haiku -1.011 0.254 (-1.509, -0.512) < 0.001
s2 × sonnet 0.171 0.255 (-0.328, 0.670) 0.502
s3 × sonnet 0.389 0.251 (-0.102, 0.880) 0.121
L Full behavioral signatures
This appendix reports the four behavioral signatures of RQ3 (action count, output tokens, working time on
completed attempts, recovery-from-failure rate) across the three slices. One table per slice with both levels
stacked; the L1 block is followed by a rule and the L2 block. CIs are 95% sample_id-clustered bootstrap,
5,000 resamples, seed shared with the rest of the validation analyses. Output tokens (thousands) and working
time (seconds) are means. Recovery rate cells with no mid-trajectory errors in the denominator are reported
as n/a; the (n recovered / n with error) raw counts are given in those cases. The full input/output/cache
decomposition under each slice is in Appendix M.
27

Table 11: H4 difference-of-differences (file subset minus non-file complement) for all three pairwise scaffold
contrasts. Primary slice, document-attachment subset (n=6 L1, n=10 L2 sample_ids). 95% sample_id-
clustered bootstrap CI. A positive DoD on s3 minus s1 with CI strictly above zero supports H4; a negative
DoD with CI strictly below zero contradicts it. One cell supports, four contradict, five inconclusive.
model level s3-s1 DoD [95% CI] s3-s2 DoD [95% CI] s2-s1 DoD [95% CI]
haiku 1 -0.364 [-0.544, -0.172] -0.364 [-0.636, -0.056] 0.000 [-0.277, 0.262]
sonnet 1 0.047 [-0.147, 0.324] 0.063 [-0.052, 0.214] -0.015 [-0.163, 0.156]
opus 1 0.142 [ 0.030, 0.252] 0.126 [ 0.015, 0.270] 0.015 [-0.138, 0.136]
gemini-3.1-pro 1 -0.001 [-0.136, 0.161] 0.111 [-0.074, 0.388] -0.112 [-0.275, 0.021]
gpt-5 1 -0.043 [-0.109, 0.021] -0.007 [-0.068, 0.058] -0.035 [-0.129, 0.061]
haiku 2 -0.314 [-0.531, -0.088] -0.036 [-0.284, 0.228] -0.278 [-0.424, -0.135]
sonnet 2 0.030 [-0.230, 0.325] 0.026 [-0.144, 0.223] 0.004 [-0.343, 0.322]
opus 2 0.079 [-0.073, 0.225] 0.086 [-0.004, 0.190] -0.007 [-0.143, 0.137]
gemini-3.1-pro 2 -0.226 [-0.342, -0.133] -0.161 [-0.278, -0.064] -0.066 [-0.146, 0.013]
gpt-5 2 -0.141 [-0.310, -0.013] -0.011 [-0.088, 0.083] -0.131 [-0.375, 0.031]
Table 12: H4 difference-of-differences, document-attachment subset, robust slice. Zero of ten cells support
H4 on the s3-s1 contrast; four contradict. The Opus L1 cell that supported H4 under the primary slice drops
to -0.002.
model level s3-s1 DoD [95% CI] s3-s2 DoD [95% CI] s2-s1 DoD [95% CI]
haiku 1 -0.361 [-0.541, -0.171] -0.335 [-0.620, -0.046] -0.026 [-0.296, 0.249]
sonnet 1 -0.023 [-0.214, 0.248] 0.057 [-0.058, 0.204] -0.081 [-0.223, 0.084]
opus 1 -0.002 [-0.083, 0.086] 0.033 [-0.065, 0.175] -0.035 [-0.186, 0.084]
gemini-3.1-pro 1 -0.001 [-0.136, 0.161] 0.111 [-0.074, 0.388] -0.112 [-0.275, 0.021]
gpt-5 1 -0.043 [-0.109, 0.021] -0.007 [-0.068, 0.058] -0.035 [-0.129, 0.061]
haiku 2 -0.299 [-0.529, -0.051] 0.002 [-0.287, 0.301] -0.301 [-0.456, -0.145]
sonnet 2 -0.021 [-0.255, 0.241] 0.111 [-0.027, 0.286] -0.132 [-0.475, 0.190]
opus 2 -0.106 [-0.247, 0.034] 0.055 [-0.021, 0.151] -0.161 [-0.293, -0.031]
gemini-3.1-pro 2 -0.226 [-0.342, -0.133] -0.161 [-0.278, -0.064] -0.066 [-0.146, 0.013]
gpt-5 2 -0.141 [-0.310, -0.013] -0.011 [-0.087, 0.083] -0.131 [-0.375, 0.031]
Table 13: H4 difference-of-differences, document-attachment subset, intersection slice. The Opus L1 sup-
porting cell from the primary slice is restored; no additional supporting cells appear.
model level s3-s1 DoD [95% CI] s3-s2 DoD [95% CI] s2-s1 DoD [95% CI]
haiku 1 -0.360 [-0.543, -0.153] -0.367 [-0.643, -0.054] 0.007 [-0.264, 0.285]
sonnet 1 0.039 [-0.157, 0.315] 0.056 [-0.059, 0.200] -0.017 [-0.167, 0.154]
opus 1 0.130 [ 0.021, 0.241] 0.121 [ 0.007, 0.271] 0.010 [-0.145, 0.132]
gemini-3.1-pro 1 -0.010 [-0.146, 0.154] 0.104 [-0.083, 0.377] -0.114 [-0.277, 0.025]
gpt-5 1 -0.058 [-0.116, 0.000] 0.000 [-0.061, 0.067] -0.058 [-0.146, 0.028]
haiku 2 -0.310 [-0.541, -0.067] -0.014 [-0.271, 0.250] -0.295 [-0.439, -0.149]
sonnet 2 0.024 [-0.236, 0.310] 0.033 [-0.138, 0.241] -0.010 [-0.356, 0.304]
opus 2 0.081 [-0.076, 0.234] 0.086 [-0.005, 0.191] -0.005 [-0.149, 0.144]
gemini-3.1-pro 2 -0.210 [-0.324, -0.108] -0.162 [-0.280, -0.061] -0.048 [-0.124, 0.029]
gpt-5 2 -0.133 [-0.312, -0.005] -0.010 [-0.089, 0.087] -0.124 [-0.376, 0.041]
28

Table 14: H4 difference-of-differences, any-file subset (documents plus image, audio, and code attachments;
n = 11 L1, n = 20 L2 sample_ids), primary slice. One cell supports (Opus L1), three contradict (Haiku L1,
Gemini L2, GPT-5 L2), six inconclusive.
model level s3-s1 DoD [95% CI] s3-s2 DoD [95% CI] s2-s1 DoD [95% CI]
haiku 1 -0.242 [-0.454, -0.031] -0.165 [-0.409, 0.079] -0.076 [-0.322, 0.153]
sonnet 1 0.027 [-0.178, 0.253] 0.000 [-0.124, 0.117] 0.027 [-0.136, 0.213]
opus 1 0.273 [ 0.098, 0.497] 0.110 [ 0.016, 0.216] 0.164 [-0.012, 0.394]
gemini-3.1-pro 1 -0.148 [-0.337, 0.022] -0.092 [-0.335, 0.148] -0.056 [-0.240, 0.142]
gpt-5 1 -0.048 [-0.120, 0.024] -0.046 [-0.144, 0.041] -0.001 [-0.116, 0.126]
haiku 2 -0.144 [-0.368, 0.094] 0.045 [-0.161, 0.260] -0.190 [-0.355, -0.013]
sonnet 2 -0.031 [-0.224, 0.164] 0.009 [-0.171, 0.209] -0.039 [-0.300, 0.216]
opus 2 0.026 [-0.109, 0.159] 0.121 [ 0.029, 0.218] -0.095 [-0.234, 0.041]
gemini-3.1-pro 2 -0.195 [-0.312, -0.077] -0.120 [-0.273, 0.025] -0.076 [-0.199, 0.056]
gpt-5 2 -0.184 [-0.335, -0.034] 0.010 [-0.100, 0.123] -0.194 [-0.358, -0.051]
Table 15: Behavioral signatures, primary slice. CIs in parentheses; output tokens in thousands; working
time in seconds (completed attempts only). L1 rows first, then L2 below the rule.
model scaf actions (95% CI) out tok (k) time (s) recovery (n/N)
gemini-3.1-pro s1 15.8 (12.6-19.1) 2.4 (1.8-3.1) 208 (168-251) 0.00 (0/3)
gpt-5 s1 12.5 (9.2-16.1) 2.6 (1.8-3.6) 98 (69-132) 0.62 (30/48)
haiku s1 22.6 (18.9-26.5) 8.3 (6.2-10.7) 124 (102-147) 0.11 (4/36)
opus s1 9.1 (6.1-12.3) 1.9 (1.1-3.0) 57 (38-79) 0.33 (1/3)
sonnet s1 16.7 (12.7-20.9) 5.1 (3.3-7.3) 136 (102-173) 0.35 (7/20)
gemini-3.1-pro s2 10.1 (7.6-13.0) 1.7 (1.2-2.3) 159 (127-194) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s2 4.7 (3.5-6.3) 1.8 (1.3-2.5) 76 (54-105) 0.80 (12/15)
haiku s2 5.7 (3.7-8.3) 3.6 (2.2-5.3) 50 (35-68) n/a (0/0)
opus s2 4.7 (2.8-7.1) 2.0 (1.0-3.2) 43 (21-72) 0.00 (0/6)
sonnet s2 6.0 (4.1-8.3) 3.1 (1.7-5.0) 78 (50-114) 0.00 (0/5)
gemini-3.1-pro s3 6.1 (4.2-8.4) 1.4 (0.9-2.0) 124 (94-160) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s3 2.3 (1.0-4.1) 1.8 (1.2-2.7) 73 (50-103) 0.62 (8/13)
haiku s3 4.2 (2.2-6.8) 3.1 (1.8-4.7) 37 (24-54) n/a (0/0)
opus s3 4.4 (2.4-7.0) 2.4 (1.5-3.7) 62 (39-91) 0.00 (0/5)
sonnet s3 4.8 (2.9-7.1) 2.6 (1.4-4.1) 62 (39-92) 0.00 (0/1)
gemini-3.1-pro s1 26.6 (23.7-29.6) 3.7 (3.2-4.1) 255 (221-288) 0.50 (4/8)
gpt-5 s1 16.3 (13.8-19.0) 3.5 (2.9-4.0) 121 (98-145) 0.65 (70/108)
haiku s1 29.9 (26.9-32.7) 8.7 (7.4-10.2) 152 (135-170) 0.19 (13/68)
opus s1 12.9 (10.3-15.5) 2.4 (1.8-3.1) 55 (33-79) 0.29 (6/21)
sonnet s1 24.2 (20.6-27.9) 5.8 (4.6-7.2) 176 (146-206) 0.28 (12/43)
gemini-3.1-pro s2 13.6 (11.2-16.0) 2.4 (1.9-2.9) 209 (174-245) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s2 8.8 (7.3-10.4) 3.4 (2.7-4.2) 119 (97-143) 0.66 (35/53)
haiku s2 6.4 (4.8-8.4) 3.8 (2.8-5.1) 62 (48-80) 1.00 (1/1)
opus s2 7.6 (5.7-9.7) 2.4 (1.7-3.3) 77 (57-101) 0.29 (5/17)
sonnet s2 7.6 (5.7-9.6) 3.5 (2.5-4.7) 106 (78-137) 0.33 (6/18)
gemini-3.1-pro s3 10.0 (7.8-12.5) 2.0 (1.6-2.5) 153 (125-183) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s3 4.8 (3.6-6.0) 2.9 (2.3-3.6) 87 (72-103) 0.75 (30/40)
haiku s3 4.4 (3.0-6.2) 3.0 (2.2-4.0) 44 (33-58) 0.33 (1/3)
opus s3 6.9 (5.0-9.4) 2.9 (2.1-4.1) 83 (63-108) 0.59 (10/17)
sonnet s3 6.1 (4.5-7.9) 3.6 (2.6-4.8) 98 (72-130) 0.38 (5/13)
29

Table 16: Behavioral signatures, robust slice (no flag). L1 rows first, then L2 below the rule. Same conven-
tions as Table 15.
model scaf actions (95% CI) out tok (k) time (s) recovery (n/N)
gemini-3.1-pro s1 15.8 (12.6-19.1) 2.4 (1.8-3.1) 208 (168-251) 0.00 (0/3)
gpt-5 s1 12.5 (9.2-16.1) 2.6 (1.8-3.6) 98 (69-132) 0.62 (30/48)
haiku s1 22.6 (18.9-26.5) 8.3 (6.2-10.6) 124 (102-147) 0.11 (4/36)
opus s1 9.1 (6.2-12.2) 1.9 (1.1-3.0) 57 (38-80) 0.33 (1/3)
sonnet s1 16.7 (12.7-21.0) 5.1 (3.3-7.3) 136 (102-173) 0.35 (7/20)
gemini-3.1-pro s2 10.1 (7.6-13.0) 1.7 (1.2-2.3) 159 (127-194) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s2 4.7 (3.5-6.3) 1.8 (1.3-2.5) 76 (54-105) 0.80 (12/15)
haiku s2 5.9 (3.9-8.6) 3.7 (2.2-5.5) 50 (34-68) n/a (0/0)
opus s2 4.6 (2.9-6.9) 1.9 (1.0-3.2) 43 (20-73) 0.00 (0/5)
sonnet s2 6.4 (4.4-8.8) 3.2 (1.7-5.3) 78 (50-114) 0.00 (0/5)
gemini-3.1-pro s3 6.1 (4.2-8.4) 1.4 (0.9-2.0) 124 (94-160) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s3 2.3 (1.0-4.1) 1.8 (1.2-2.7) 73 (50-103) 0.62 (8/13)
haiku s3 4.3 (2.2-6.9) 3.2 (1.9-4.8) 37 (24-54) n/a (0/0)
opus s3 4.8 (2.6-7.6) 2.5 (1.5-3.8) 62 (39-91) 0.00 (0/5)
sonnet s3 5.1 (3.1-7.6) 2.7 (1.5-4.4) 62 (39-92) 0.00 (0/1)
gemini-3.1-pro s1 26.6 (23.7-29.6) 3.7 (3.2-4.1) 255 (221-288) 0.50 (4/8)
gpt-5 s1 16.3 (13.8-19.0) 3.5 (2.9-4.0) 121 (98-145) 0.65 (70/108)
haiku s1 29.9 (26.9-32.7) 8.7 (7.4-10.2) 152 (135-170) 0.19 (13/68)
opus s1 12.9 (10.3-15.5) 2.4 (1.8-3.1) 55 (33-79) 0.29 (6/21)
sonnet s1 24.2 (20.6-27.9) 5.8 (4.6-7.2) 176 (146-206) 0.28 (12/43)
gemini-3.1-pro s2 13.6 (11.2-16.0) 2.4 (1.9-2.9) 209 (174-245) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s2 8.8 (7.3-10.5) 3.4 (2.7-4.2) 119 (98-143) 0.66 (35/53)
haiku s2 7.4 (5.4-9.7) 4.2 (3.0-5.7) 62 (48-80) 1.00 (1/1)
opus s2 8.5 (6.3-11.0) 2.6 (1.8-3.7) 77 (57-101) 0.36 (5/14)
sonnet s2 8.6 (6.5-11.0) 3.9 (2.6-5.4) 106 (78-137) 0.40 (6/15)
gemini-3.1-pro s3 10.0 (7.8-12.5) 2.0 (1.6-2.5) 153 (125-183) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s3 4.8 (3.6-6.0) 2.9 (2.3-3.6) 87 (72-103) 0.75 (30/40)
haiku s3 4.7 (3.1-6.6) 3.1 (2.2-4.1) 44 (33-57) 0.50 (1/2)
opus s3 8.3 (5.9-11.1) 3.3 (2.3-4.7) 83 (63-107) 0.59 (10/17)
sonnet s3 6.9 (5.0-9.1) 3.9 (2.7-5.3) 98 (72-130) 0.42 (5/12)
30

Table 17: Behavioral signatures, intersection slice. L1 rows first, then L2 below the rule. Same conventions
as Table 15.
model scaf actions (95% CI) out tok (k) time (s) recovery (n/N)
gemini-3.1-pro s1 15.9 (12.6-19.4) 2.5 (1.8-3.2) 210 (169-253) 0.00 (0/3)
gpt-5 s1 12.2 (9.0-16.0) 2.6 (1.8-3.5) 97 (67-132) 0.61 (28/46)
haiku s1 22.5 (18.7-26.3) 8.3 (6.1-10.6) 124 (101-146) 0.12 (4/34)
opus s1 9.0 (6.2-12.3) 1.9 (1.0-3.0) 56 (37-80) 0.33 (1/3)
sonnet s1 16.5 (12.4-20.8) 5.1 (3.2-7.4) 135 (100-174) 0.39 (7/18)
gemini-3.1-pro s2 10.0 (7.5-13.0) 1.7 (1.2-2.3) 158 (125-194) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s2 4.8 (3.5-6.3) 1.7 (1.2-2.4) 76 (54-104) 0.80 (12/15)
haiku s2 5.8 (3.7-8.2) 3.6 (2.2-5.3) 50 (34-69) n/a (0/0)
opus s2 4.7 (2.9-7.1) 1.9 (1.0-3.2) 43 (20-71) 0.00 (0/6)
sonnet s2 5.9 (4.0-8.3) 2.9 (1.4-4.8) 71 (45-104) 0.00 (0/5)
gemini-3.1-pro s3 5.9 (4.0-8.3) 1.3 (0.9-1.9) 121 (91-156) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s3 2.4 (0.9-4.2) 1.8 (1.1-2.6) 73 (48-102) 0.62 (8/13)
haiku s3 4.2 (2.2-6.8) 3.1 (1.8-4.7) 37 (24-54) n/a (0/0)
opus s3 4.4 (2.4-7.0) 2.4 (1.4-3.7) 61 (39-90) 0.00 (0/5)
sonnet s3 4.9 (3.0-7.1) 2.6 (1.5-4.1) 62 (39-90) 0.00 (0/1)
gemini-3.1-pro s1 26.0 (23.0-29.0) 3.6 (3.1-4.1) 252 (218-286) 0.57 (4/7)
gpt-5 s1 16.0 (13.4-18.7) 3.5 (2.9-4.1) 121 (98-147) 0.67 (65/97)
haiku s1 29.5 (26.4-32.5) 8.7 (7.3-10.2) 149 (132-168) 0.20 (13/65)
opus s1 12.7 (10.2-15.6) 2.5 (1.9-3.2) 57 (34-83) 0.30 (6/20)
sonnet s1 23.8 (20.2-27.4) 5.9 (4.6-7.4) 175 (144-209) 0.31 (12/39)
gemini-3.1-pro s2 14.0 (11.5-16.7) 2.5 (2.0-3.0) 212 (176-250) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s2 8.6 (7.0-10.5) 3.4 (2.7-4.2) 118 (95-142) 0.66 (31/47)
haiku s2 6.9 (5.1-9.0) 4.0 (2.9-5.3) 63 (48-80) 1.00 (1/1)
opus s2 7.9 (5.9-10.2) 2.5 (1.7-3.5) 79 (56-106) 0.29 (5/17)
sonnet s2 8.0 (6.0-10.2) 3.6 (2.5-4.9) 106 (76-138) 0.33 (6/18)
gemini-3.1-pro s3 10.5 (8.1-13.0) 2.1 (1.6-2.7) 157 (127-189) n/a (0/0)
gpt-5 s3 4.8 (3.6-6.1) 2.9 (2.3-3.7) 86 (70-103) 0.76 (29/38)
haiku s3 4.6 (3.0-6.5) 3.1 (2.2-4.1) 44 (33-57) 0.33 (1/3)
opus s3 7.1 (5.1-9.5) 3.0 (2.1-4.2) 83 (62-109) 0.59 (10/17)
sonnet s3 6.4 (4.7-8.3) 3.6 (2.6-4.9) 97 (70-128) 0.38 (5/13)
M Token decomposition: input, output, cache-read, cache-write
The body of the paper uses output tokens as the cross-provider behavioral signature, since provider-reported
total_tokens mixes the input, output, cache-read, and cache-write streams and the cache accounting varies
by provider. This appendix reports all four streams per cell (means in thousands of tokens), allowing the
reader to read the full token activity behind each (model, scaffold, level) configuration. Three notes: (a)
Anthropic models report cache-read separately from input and frequently show input=0.0 on s1 because the
prompt is identical across attempts and the second-and-later attempts hit the cache for the full prompt.
(b) OpenAI models do not surface a separate cache-write field, so cache-write reads as 0.0 for GPT-5.
(c) Gemini’s total includes a small unaccounted-for residual (typically 4–7k tokens per attempt), which is
consistent with hosted-tool token activity (the google_search grounding tool) that does not surface in the
four named streams. All tables are from the primary slice; the robust and intersection slices are available in
the supplementary materials.
N Full cost-per-correct ranking
This appendix reports the per-level realized cost-per-correct rankings under the three slices (primary, robust
no-flag, intersection). Each row is one (model, scaffold) cell at the indicated level. Rank is ascending by
realized cost per correct, so rank 1 is the cheapest cell on the panel. The point estimate and 95% bootstrap
CI come from 5,000 sample_id-clustered resamples (seed shared with Sections 4.1.2, 4.1.3, and 4.4). The slice
definitions match the rest of the paper: primary includes every attempt-unit; robust excludes units carrying
31

Table 18: Token decomposition (thousands of tokens, primary slice). Rows are (model, scaffold), L1 stacked
above L2 below the rule. The Total column is the provider-reported total_tokens; for Gemini, Total
exceeds the sum of the four streams by a small residual (hosted-tool tokens).
model scaf input output cache rd cache wr total
gemini-3.1-pro s1 61.9 2.4 179.3 0.0 248.9
gpt-5 s1 23.5 2.6 160.4 0.0 186.6
haiku s1 7.8 8.3 777.5 44.0 837.6
opus s1 0.0 1.9 143.4 12.8 158.1
sonnet s1 0.0 5.1 394.9 25.5 425.6
gemini-3.1-pro s2 60.3 1.7 57.7 0.0 126.4
gpt-5 s2 18.6 1.8 38.5 0.0 58.9
haiku s2 7.4 3.6 185.0 66.9 263.0
opus s2 8.0 2.0 102.9 44.5 157.3
sonnet s2 12.8 3.1 255.2 92.2 363.2
gemini-3.1-pro s3 34.6 1.4 34.6 0.0 74.5
gpt-5 s3 14.7 1.8 41.5 0.0 58.0
haiku s3 5.7 3.1 103.6 30.2 142.6
opus s3 4.0 2.4 97.9 22.9 127.2
sonnet s3 4.5 2.6 141.9 27.7 176.8
gemini-3.1-pro s1 99.6 3.7 367.2 0.0 476.2
gpt-5 s1 34.3 3.5 222.9 0.0 260.7
haiku s1 7.5 8.7 1256.4 65.9 1338.5
opus s1 0.0 2.4 294.0 17.3 313.8
sonnet s1 0.0 5.8 675.7 36.8 718.4
gemini-3.1-pro s2 83.2 2.4 88.5 0.0 180.8
gpt-5 s2 41.8 3.4 105.4 0.0 150.6
haiku s2 8.6 3.8 456.6 132.4 601.3
opus s2 10.0 2.4 242.8 59.0 314.2
sonnet s2 23.1 3.5 481.0 118.7 626.3
gemini-3.1-pro s3 55.4 2.0 64.5 0.0 126.4
gpt-5 s3 24.1 2.9 58.3 0.0 85.3
haiku s3 7.1 3.0 226.0 58.2 294.2
opus s3 12.8 2.9 231.8 35.6 283.1
sonnet s3 25.5 3.6 530.3 84.4 643.7
the provider_serialization_bug flag; intersection retains only sample_ids that completed cleanly in every
(model, scaffold) cell at the level.
N.1 Primary slice
32

Table 19: Realized cost per correct, primary slice, Level 1. Rank is ascending. n_attempted is 159 for every
cell at L1. cpc realized is total log-derived realized spend on the cell divided by n_correct.
rank model scaffold n_correct total cost (USD) cpc realized [95% CI]
1 gemini-3.1-pro s3 134 18.57 0.139 [0.062, 0.257]
2 gpt-5 s3 135 23.56 0.175 [0.107, 0.276]
3 gpt-5 s2 134 26.26 0.196 [0.139, 0.274]
4 opus s1 132 31.72 0.240 [0.153, 0.354]
5 gemini-3.1-pro s1 125 31.08 0.249 [0.174, 0.350]
6 gemini-3.1-pro s2 132 33.36 0.253 [0.134, 0.429]
7 sonnet s3 116 31.67 0.273 [0.177, 0.398]
8 haiku s2 73 22.03 0.302 [0.199, 0.463]
9 haiku s3 36 11.02 0.306 [0.206, 0.484]
10 gpt-5 s1 129 44.17 0.342 [0.222, 0.497]
11 opus s3 112 43.36 0.387 [0.255, 0.574]
12 haiku s1 73 28.93 0.396 [0.277, 0.568]
13 sonnet s1 105 46.31 0.441 [0.296, 0.646]
14 opus s2 121 66.61 0.550 [0.346, 0.807]
15 sonnet s2 116 80.58 0.695 [0.317, 1.334]
Table 20: Realized cost per correct, primary slice, Level 2. Rank is ascending. n_attempted is 258 for every
cell at L2.
rank model scaffold n_correct total cost (USD) cpc realized [95% CI]
1 gemini-3.1-pro s3 222 50.79 0.229 [0.145, 0.330]
2 gpt-5 s3 212 61.09 0.288 [0.221, 0.378]
3 gemini-3.1-pro s2 194 79.03 0.407 [0.279, 0.563]
4 gemini-3.1-pro s1 179 87.98 0.491 [0.381, 0.639]
5 gpt-5 s1 197 99.86 0.507 [0.386, 0.662]
6 gpt-5 s2 201 101.98 0.507 [0.362, 0.694]
7 haiku s3 58 30.26 0.522 [0.382, 0.755]
8 opus s1 144 81.57 0.566 [0.403, 0.791]
9 haiku s2 110 71.52 0.650 [0.451, 0.925]
10 opus s3 169 122.71 0.726 [0.519, 0.983]
11 sonnet s1 135 110.60 0.819 [0.610, 1.133]
12 haiku s1 81 66.96 0.827 [0.616, 1.157]
13 opus s2 180 155.06 0.861 [0.633, 1.156]
14 sonnet s3 154 156.19 1.014 [0.684, 1.448]
15 sonnet s2 160 191.80 1.199 [0.818, 1.695]
N.2 Robust slice (provider_serialization_bug units excluded)
33

Table 21: Realized cost per correct, robust slice, Level 1. Rank is ascending. Cells unaffected by the flag
(cross-provider models, Anthropic L1 cells without flagged units) match the primary L1 values; flagged units
removed for Anthropic cells where they appear.
rank model scaffold n_correct total cost (USD) cpc realized [95% CI]
1 gemini-3.1-pro s3 134 18.57 0.139 [0.062, 0.257]
2 gpt-5 s3 135 23.56 0.175 [0.107, 0.276]
3 gpt-5 s2 134 26.26 0.196 [0.139, 0.274]
4 opus s1 132 31.72 0.240 [0.153, 0.354]
5 gemini-3.1-pro s1 125 31.08 0.249 [0.174, 0.350]
6 gemini-3.1-pro s2 132 33.36 0.253 [0.134, 0.429]
7 sonnet s3 116 31.67 0.273 [0.177, 0.398]
8 haiku s2 73 21.07 0.289 [0.193, 0.441]
9 haiku s3 36 11.02 0.306 [0.206, 0.484]
10 gpt-5 s1 129 44.17 0.342 [0.222, 0.497]
11 opus s3 112 38.13 0.340 [0.226, 0.508]
12 haiku s1 73 28.93 0.396 [0.277, 0.568]
13 sonnet s1 105 46.31 0.441 [0.296, 0.646]
14 opus s2 121 60.61 0.501 [0.319, 0.741]
15 sonnet s2 116 77.50 0.668 [0.305, 1.282]
Table 22: Realized cost per correct, robust slice, Level 2. Rank is ascending. The Anthropic L2 cells carrying
flagged units (Opus, Sonnet, and Haiku s2/s3) drop relative to the primary L2 ranking; cross-provider cells
are unchanged. Ranks 6 and 7 coincide at three decimals; ordering is by full-precision cpc.
rank model scaffold n_correct total cost (USD) cpc realized [95% CI]
1 gemini-3.1-pro s3 222 50.79 0.229 [0.145, 0.330]
2 gpt-5 s3 212 61.09 0.288 [0.221, 0.378]
3 gemini-3.1-pro s2 194 79.03 0.407 [0.279, 0.563]
4 haiku s3 58 27.30 0.471 [0.347, 0.669]
5 gemini-3.1-pro s1 179 87.98 0.491 [0.381, 0.639]
6 gpt-5 s1 197 99.86 0.507 [0.386, 0.662]
7 gpt-5 s2 201 101.98 0.507 [0.364, 0.706]
8 haiku s2 110 60.95 0.554 [0.400, 0.775]
9 opus s1 144 81.57 0.566 [0.403, 0.791]
10 opus s3 169 100.49 0.595 [0.414, 0.811]
11 opus s2 180 135.50 0.753 [0.549, 1.005]
12 sonnet s1 135 110.60 0.819 [0.610, 1.133]
13 haiku s1 81 66.96 0.827 [0.616, 1.157]
14 sonnet s3 154 127.94 0.831 [0.574, 1.158]
15 sonnet s2 160 155.16 0.970 [0.668, 1.348]
N.3 Intersection slice (per-level shared sample_ids)
34

Table 23: Realized cost per correct, intersection slice, Level 1. Rank is ascending. The intersection retains
52 of 53 sample_ids at L1; n_attempted is 156 for every cell.
rank model scaffold n_correct total cost (USD) cpc realized [95% CI]
1 gemini-3.1-pro s3 132 17.92 0.136 [0.059, 0.259]
2 gpt-5 s3 134 22.76 0.170 [0.103, 0.274]
3 gpt-5 s2 134 25.63 0.191 [0.133, 0.270]
4 opus s1 129 30.20 0.234 [0.146, 0.347]
5 gemini-3.1-pro s1 122 30.71 0.252 [0.174, 0.354]
6 gemini-3.1-pro s2 129 32.65 0.253 [0.133, 0.430]
7 sonnet s3 116 31.33 0.270 [0.175, 0.397]
8 haiku s3 36 10.28 0.286 [0.194, 0.448]
9 haiku s2 72 20.74 0.288 [0.188, 0.443]
10 gpt-5 s1 126 42.59 0.338 [0.217, 0.496]
11 opus s3 111 40.81 0.368 [0.239, 0.541]
12 haiku s1 73 28.31 0.388 [0.267, 0.567]
13 sonnet s1 104 44.58 0.429 [0.286, 0.626]
14 sonnet s2 115 53.13 0.462 [0.271, 0.721]
15 opus s2 119 63.17 0.531 [0.330, 0.778]
Table 24: Realized cost per correct, intersection slice, Level 2. Rank is ascending. The intersection retains
80 of 86 sample_ids at L2; n_attempted is 240 for every cell.
rank model scaffold n_correct total cost (USD) cpc realized [95% CI]
1 gemini-3.1-pro s3 205 49.87 0.243 [0.154, 0.354]
2 gpt-5 s3 198 56.37 0.285 [0.214, 0.376]
3 gemini-3.1-pro s2 179 77.36 0.432 [0.294, 0.605]
4 gemini-3.1-pro s1 169 80.46 0.476 [0.366, 0.619]
5 gpt-5 s1 186 92.17 0.496 [0.376, 0.652]
6 gpt-5 s2 188 93.94 0.500 [0.351, 0.710]
7 haiku s3 54 28.30 0.524 [0.377, 0.767]
8 opus s1 140 75.03 0.536 [0.380, 0.746]
9 haiku s2 107 69.07 0.645 [0.448, 0.933]
10 opus s3 163 115.16 0.706 [0.495, 0.967]
11 sonnet s1 129 102.28 0.793 [0.579, 1.094]
12 haiku s1 77 61.43 0.798 [0.586, 1.138]
13 opus s2 173 148.32 0.857 [0.625, 1.157]
14 sonnet s3 148 127.14 0.859 [0.591, 1.206]
15 sonnet s2 155 147.37 0.951 [0.676, 1.311]
O Realized versus happy-path cost per correct
This appendix reports realized and happy-path cost per correct side-by-side for the primary slice. Happy-
path cost per correct uses each completed unit’s latest-eval cost (rather than the sum across all retries) and
restricts both numerator and denominator to completed units only. The two metrics coincide for any cell
with 100% completion, since there are no retries and no errored units to differentiate. They diverge where
errored units carried token cost without contributing to the n_correct denominator; the gap quantifies the
cost overhead of attempts that paid for tokens but did not score.
35

Table 25: Realized versus happy-path cost per correct, primary slice, Level 1. Sorted ascending by realized.
Cells with realized == happy-path are 100% completion cells; cells with realized > happy-path carry token
cost on errored units.
model scaffold cpc realized cpc happy-path delta
gemini-3.1-pro s3 0.139 0.139 0.000
gpt-5 s3 0.175 0.175 0.000
gpt-5 s2 0.196 0.196 0.000
opus s1 0.240 0.240 0.000
gemini-3.1-pro s1 0.249 0.249 0.000
gemini-3.1-pro s2 0.253 0.253 0.000
sonnet s3 0.273 0.273 0.000
haiku s2 0.302 0.289 0.013
haiku s3 0.306 0.306 0.000
gpt-5 s1 0.342 0.342 0.000
opus s3 0.387 0.340 0.047
haiku s1 0.396 0.396 0.000
sonnet s1 0.441 0.441 0.000
opus s2 0.550 0.501 0.049
sonnet s2 0.695 0.668 0.027
Table 26: Realized versus happy-path cost per correct, primary slice, Level 2. Sorted ascending by realized.
The Anthropic L2 cluster shows the largest deltas, driven by provider_serialization_bug units that paid
token cost without completing.
model scaffold cpc realized cpc happy-path delta
gemini-3.1-pro s3 0.229 0.229 0.000
gpt-5 s3 0.288 0.288 0.000
gemini-3.1-pro s2 0.407 0.407 0.000
gemini-3.1-pro s1 0.491 0.491 0.000
gpt-5 s1 0.507 0.507 0.000
gpt-5 s2 0.507 0.507 0.000
haiku s3 0.522 0.470 0.052
opus s1 0.566 0.566 0.000
haiku s2 0.650 0.487 0.163
opus s3 0.726 0.595 0.131
sonnet s1 0.819 0.819 0.000
haiku s1 0.827 0.824 0.003
opus s2 0.861 0.753 0.108
sonnet s3 1.014 0.831 0.183
sonnet s2 1.199 0.970 0.229
P provider_serialization_bug per-cell summary
Sample-level counts of records carrying the provider_serialization_bug flag, by (model, scaffold, attempt)
cell. The flag fires when Anthropic’s API returned a web_fetch_tool_result error code that the published
Anthropic Python SDK could not deserialize. No flagged sample received a clean retry; the resume sweep
targeted credit-exhaustion failures, not flagged samples.
Q prompt_too_long retry-threading table
Each row corresponds to a unique (sample_id, model, scaffold, attempt) unit that hit a prompt is too
long error in at least one .eval file. later_flagged is True if a subsequent .eval for the same unit was
36

Table 27: Per-cell counts of provider_serialization_bug-flagged samples in the validation run. 314
samples across 13 cells. concentration is on scaffolds s2 and s3, consistent with web_fetch usage patterns in
those scaffolds.
model scaffold attempt n_flagged n_resolved n_unresolved
haiku s2 1 4 0 4
haiku s2 2 9 0 9
haiku s2 3 36 0 36
haiku s3 3 26 0 26
opus s2 2 18 0 18
opus s2 3 34 0 34
opus s3 2 37 0 37
opus s3 3 41 0 41
sonnet s2 2 2 0 2
sonnet s2 3 53 0 53
sonnet s3 1 1 0 1
sonnet s3 2 1 0 1
sonnet s3 3 52 0 52
assigned the provider_serialization_bug flag. later_resolved is True if a subsequent .eval completed
without error.
37

Table 28: prompt is too long retry-threading for the validation run. 33 units (39 raw error records).
15 units later flagged with provider_serialization_bug; 3 later resolved cleanly; 15 with neither (13
remained terminal, the p2l bucket in Table 2; 2 ended in a different error). sample IDs truncated to first 8
characters; full IDs are in the project repository.
sample_id model scaffold attempt later_flagged later_resolved
3ff6b7a9 haiku s2 1 Y
48eb8242 haiku s2 1 Y
65638e28 haiku s2 1 Y
71345b0a haiku s2 1 Y
7673d772 haiku s2 1 Y
7a4a336d haiku s2 1
9f41b083 haiku s2 1
c8b7e059 haiku s2 1
08c0b6e9 haiku s2 2 Y
0a3cd321 haiku s2 2 Y
0b260a57 haiku s2 2 Y
16d825ff haiku s2 2 Y
1dcc160f haiku s2 2 Y
3ff6b7a9 haiku s2 2 Y
48eb8242 haiku s2 2 Y
4b6bb5f7 haiku s2 2 Y
65638e28 haiku s2 2 Y
7a4a336d haiku s2 2 Y
9f41b083 haiku s2 2
c8b7e059 haiku s2 2
ecbc4f94 haiku s2 2 Y
56137764 haiku s2 3
7673d772 haiku s2 3
9f41b083 haiku s2 3
9f41b083 haiku s3 1
9f41b083 haiku s3 2
65638e28 haiku s3 3
9f41b083 haiku s3 3
48eb8242 opus s2 3
48eb8242 sonnet s2 2 Y
c8b7e059 sonnet s2 2 Y
48eb8242 sonnet s3 2
48eb8242 sonnet s3 3
R Content-filter block inspection
28 sample-level records carried the Output blocked by content filtering policy error across two
unique GAIA questions. The 28 raw records span 21 distinct attempt-units: 15 terminally blocked (the
cf bucket in Table 2), 4 resolved on a later clean run, and 2 that ended in a different error. Each block
below shows the GAIA question text followed by the (model, scaffold, attempt, level) cells in which the block
occurred, with turn counts at the time of the block.
38

R.1 Question A:
Table 29: content-filter block: question A. 23 occurrences across the Anthropic models. All blocked on the
same level 2 GAIA question. Several rows duplicate because the sample was retried within the same attempt
and was blocked again.
sample_id:
ed58682d-bc52-4baa-9eb0-4eb81e1edacc
Question:
What is the last word before the second chorus of the King of Pop’s fifth single from his sixth studio
album?
model scaffold attempt n_total n_assistant n_tool
haiku s1 1 16 7 7
haiku s1 2 16 7 7
haiku s1 2 24 11 11
haiku s2 2 3 1 0
haiku s3 1 3 1 0
haiku s3 1 3 1 0
haiku s3 2 3 1 0
haiku s3 2 3 1 0
haiku s3 3 3 1 0
opus s1 3 6 2 2
opus s2 2 3 1 0
opus s2 3 3 1 0
sonnet s1 1 8 3 3
sonnet s2 1 1 0 0
sonnet s2 1 1 0 0
sonnet s2 2 1 0 0
sonnet s2 2 1 0 0
sonnet s2 3 1 0 0
sonnet s3 1 3 1 0
sonnet s3 1 3 1 0
sonnet s3 2 1 0 0
sonnet s3 2 1 0 0
sonnet s3 3 3 1 0
39

R.2 Question B:
Table 30: content-filter block: question B. 5 occurrences, all sonnet on the same level 1 GAIA question. Block
fired both on initial user message (3-turn rows) and mid-trajectory after tool calls (12-turn and 56-turn rows).
sample_id:
7673d772-ef80-4f0f-a602-1bf4485c9b43
Question:
On Cornell Law School website’s legal information institute, under the fifth section of federal rules alpha-
betically, what word was deleted in the last amendment to the first rule in the article that has "witnesses"
in the most titles as of 2021?
model scaffold attempt n_total n_assistant n_tool
sonnet s1 2 12 5 5
sonnet s1 3 56 27 27
sonnet s3 1 3 1 0
sonnet s3 2 5 2 1
sonnet s3 3 3 1 0
40
