
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2010.06595
GitHub: https://github.com/oldsphere/BigRodent

With Little Power Comes Great Responsibility
Dallas Card
1 
Peter Henderson
1 
Urvashi Khandelwal
1 
Robin Jia
1
Kyle Mahowald
2 
Dan Jurafsky
1
1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA
2
University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA
dcard@stanford.edu, phend@stanford.edu,
urvashik@stanford.edu, robinjia@stanford.edu,
mahowald@ucsb.edu, jurafsky@stanford.edu
Abstract
Despite its importance to experimental design,
statistical power (the probability that, given
a real effect, an experiment will reject the
null hypothesis) has largely been ignored by
the NLP community. Underpowered experi-
ments make it more difficult to discern the
difference between statistical noise and mean-
ingful model improvements, and increase the
chances of exaggerated findings. By meta-
analyzing a set of existing NLP papers and
datasets, we characterize typical power for a
variety of settings and conclude that under-
powered experiments are common in the NLP
literature. In particular, for several tasks in
the popular GLUE benchmark, small test sets
mean that most attempted comparisons to state
of the art models will not be adequately pow-
ered. Similarly, based on reasonable assump-
tions, we find that the most typical experimen-
tal design for human rating studies will be un-
derpowered to detect small model differences,
of the sort that are frequently studied. For ma-
chine translation, we find that typical test sets
of 2000 sentences have approximately 75%
power to detect differences of 1 BLEU point.
To improve the situation going forward, we
give an overview of best practices for power
analysis in NLP and release a series of note-
books to assist with future power analyses.
1
1 Introduction
Despite its importance to empirical evaluation, rel-
atively little attention has been paid to statistical
power in NLP. In particular, if it is the case that
typical experiments in NLP are underpowered, not
only would we expect many meaningful improve-
ments to go undetected, we would also expect many
apparently significant differences to be exagger-
ated (Gelman and Carlin, 2014). In this paper,
we build on past work calling for greater rigor
1
https://github.com/dallascard/NLP-power-analysis
A B
0
25
50
75
100
True pref. (%)
trials with n=100
Obs pref. for B
trials with n=25
Obs pref. for B
Figure 1: Cartoon example of statistical power in com-
paring two models: 65% of all people in the population
always prefer system B (left). A comparison using a
sample of 100 people would be well-powered (middle):
over 80% of such samples will show a significant dif-
ference (plotted in red) from the null hypothesis that
the models are equally good (dashed line). In samples
of 25 people (right), far fewer tests will be significant
(power ≈ 30%). Note that the observed mean of sig-
nificant findings (dotted line) slightly overestimates the
true proportion that prefer system B when n = 100 and
more severely overestimates it when n = 25.
in evaluation (McCoy et al., 2019; Azer et al.,
2020), including the need for careful hypothesis
testing (Koehn, 2004; Berg-Kirkpatrick et al., 2012;
Søgaard et al., 2014; Dror et al., 2018), and show
why and how power matters to NLP, addressing
challenges unique to this domain.
Roughly speaking, power is the probability that
a statistical test will successfully detect a true effect.
As an illustrative example, imagine comparing two
dialog systems (see Figure 1). We want to know if
people tend to prefer one system over the other. To
test this, we will need multiple people to evaluate
the systems. But how many? Once we have col-
lected data, a statistical test will tell us if we can
reject the null hypothesis the systems are equally
good. Assuming the systems are not identical, sta-
tistical power is the probability that the experiment
will return a significant result (or equivalently, it is
one minus the probability of failing to detect the
difference as significant). Although we don’t know
the magnitude of this difference, power analysis
helps to estimate how much power an experiment
arXiv:2010.06595v1 [cs.CL] 13 Oct 2020

will have under various assumptions.
Power depends on multiple factors, including
the statistical test used, the significance threshold,
true effect size, variance, and sample size. All else
being equal, experiments with larger samples will
have greater power than smaller samples, as shown
in Figure 1. Similarly, larger effects and those
with less variance are easier to detect, and there-
fore require fewer samples for equivalent power.
Importantly, note that if we do find a significant
difference, this does not imply that the experiment
had high power.
2
Proceeding with a test that is underpowered (i.e.,
too few subjects or items; often taken to mean
less than 80% power; Cohen, 1962) means that
one is less likely to be able to draw any useful
statistical conclusion from the experiment, and has
contributed, in part, to the replication crisis in other
fields (Button et al., 2013; Szucs and Ioannidis,
2017; Ioannidis et al., 2017). Routinely running
experiments with low statistical power undermines
the scientific enterprise. Not only will true effects
go undetected; when significant effects are found,
they are likely to be noisier and have lower positive
predictive value (Button et al., 2013).
Moreover, significant findings from underpow-
ered experiments are more likely to exaggerate or
reverse the true effect – so-called Type-M (magni-
tude) and Type-S (sign) errors, respectively (Gel-
man and Carlin, 2014). This problem can lead to
systematic distortions in the literature if only sig-
nificant findings are published, especially if these
results are based on underpowered experiments
(Scargle, 1999). The effect of Type-M error can
be seen in Figure 1; significant differences are less
likely to be found in smaller samples (right), but
among those tests that are significant, the observed
difference will tend to exaggerate the true differ-
ence (left) by more than a larger sample (middle).
For further discussion of Type-M and Type-S er-
rors, please refer to Appendix B.
Here, we investigate how these issues affect NLP.
Although retrospective analysis of power involves
challenges, we present evidence that underpow-
ered experiments are widespread in NLP research.
Among human evaluations, we find most experi-
mental designs involve too few items and/or raters
2
Using the observed outcome from a single experiment
to compute power falls into the trap of post-hoc power anal-
ysis and is not recommended. For additional background on
statistical power, power analysis, null-hypothesis significance
testing, and post-hoc analysis, please refer to Appendix A.
to detect small effects ( §5). For comparing models
in terms of accuracy, we find that some widely used
benchmark datasets, including MRPC and SST-2,
are now too small to be able to properly measure
future progress against top performing models (§3).
We also introduce a novel approach to power analy-
sis for machine translation and characterize power
in experiments testing for differences in BLEU
(§ 4). Finally, a survey of recent papers reveals a
general lack of statistical evaluation and a dearth
of detailed reporting (§5.1).
To improve future practice, we suggest broader
adoption of power analyses prior to evaluation, pro-
vide guidance on running power analyses in NLP,
and release a series of notebooks for this purpose.
2 Power Analysis for NLP
Because most NLP tasks do not take the form of
standard experiments in other sciences (Kraemer
and Blasey, 2015; Westfall et al., 2014), it is non-
trivial to run power analyses for many tasks of
interest. While we cannot cover every scenario,
we present here a generalizable, simulation-based
approach to power analysis, along with three sam-
ple applications, which can be extended as neces-
sary. Such an approach is modular, reusable, and
transparent, and encourages planning of analyses
in advance of data collection.
Every power analysis requires assumptions, and
there is not likely to be a single correct approach.
Rather, the point is to make one’s assumptions ex-
plicit, and include enough detail so as to account
for whatever is likely to be observed. By using
reasonable assumptions, one can help to ensure
that one’s experiment is sufficiently well-powered,
In the case of NLP, this means that one recruits
enough subjects, collects enough ratings, or uses a
large enough test set.
The general procedure we suggest for power
analysis is described in detail in Figure 2. At a
high level, the idea is to estimate power by running
simulations. Recall that power is the probability
of detecting a true effect, conditional on the ex-
perimental setting (effect size, variance, etc.) and
significance threshold. Thus, if one can translate
these assumptions into a process for generating
simulated data, we can estimate power by gener-
ating many simulated datasets using assumed or
estimated parameter values, running each sample
through a significance test, and reporting the pro-
portion that are found to be significant.

Define a generative process G(n, e
∗
, h) parameterized by
number of items, n, hypothesized effect e
∗ 
for the statistic of
interest E, and other relevant parameters h (e.g., variance).
Also choose a statistical test T (D), which returns a p-value
p when performed on data D sampled from G(n, e
∗
, h).
Finally, choose the size of the dataset to be sampled, n,
significance threshold, α, and number of repetitions, r.
1. For i in range(r):
• sample a dataset of size n, D
i 
∼ G(n, e
∗
, h)
• compute the effect of interest on this sample,
e
i 
= E(D
i
)
• also compute a p-value according to the test of
interest: p
i 
= T (D
i
)
2. Power ≈ 
1
r
∑
(I[p
i 
≤ α] · I[sign(e
i
) = sign(e
∗
)])
Figure 2: An algorithm for power analysis by simu-
lation. For the example of comparing two systems
presented in Figure 1, e
∗ 
is the assumed overall pro-
portion of people who prefer system B, relative to
the null hypothesis, p = 0.5, G(n, e
∗
, h) is simply
Binomial(n, 0.5 + e
∗
), while e
i 
is the observed propor-
tion of people who prefer system B in sample i, again
relative to 0.5. For extensions to estimate Type-M and
Type-S error, see Appendix B.
The key to generalizing this approach is to begin
with the end in mind. In particular, if one plans to
test for a difference between models, one needs to
choose the statistical test that will be used. That
test will determine the level of detail required in
the generative process for simulating data.
To return to the opening example of evaluating
dialog systems, we want to test if people prefer one
system over the other (Ai et al., 2007). If we ig-
nore the nuances of human preference for now (but
see § 5 for a more nuanced approach), and simply
assume that each person either prefers system A or
system B, the only assumption we need to make
for a power analysis in this setting is the proportion
of people in the population who prefer system B.
We can then simulate samples of n people (each
of whom independently has the same probability
of preferring system B) as a draw from a binomial
distribution, and repeat this thousands of times.
3
For each sample, we then test whether the propor-
tion of people who prefer system B is significantly
different from 0.5. The estimated power of this ex-
periment would thus be the proportion of simulated
differences that are found to be significant.
4
3
We don’t need to address variance in this scenario, as the
variance of a binomial distribution is a function of its mean.
4
More direct solutions are available for some settings, in-
cluding this one (see Appendix E.5), but we describe it using
The most difficult part of power analyses is es-
timating the relevant quantities, such as the true
proportion of people that prefer system B. Note,
however, that one can always compute what power
would be for a range of possible values, and indeed,
this is the recommended procedure. For estimat-
ing the relevant parameters within an NLP context,
we will primarily rely on data from the literature,
measurements on validation data, and estimates
from external datasets (see § 3.2). However, where
appropriate, pilot studies may also be informative.
In the remainder of this paper, we consider three
scenarios of interest in depth, and assess the state
of power in the NLP literature for each.
3 Comparing Models on Accuracy
It is common in NLP research to look for mod-
els which improve over state of the art (SOTA) on
various benchmarks. However, an important but
rarely asked question is, can these benchmarks sup-
port the kinds of comparisons we want to make?
Many have emphasized the need for proper sig-
nificance testing to avoid spurious findings, but
if an experiment’s test set is small, the minimum
detectable effect (MDE) size may be large: only
large improvements will yield sufficiently powered
comparisons (i.e., ≥ 80% power). If an experiment
is badly underpowered, it cannot provide useful
evidence that one model achieves slightly better
performance than another for the underlying data
distribution. Reliance on such evidence risks lead-
ing to over-confidence about the relative ranking
of various models. As we show in §3.3, there is
legitimate reason to be concerned about this in the
case of certain widely used benchmarks.
3.1 Significance test for comparing classifiers
The standard statistical test for comparing classi-
fiers on paired data is McNemar’s test (Dietterich,
1998; Dror et al., 2018), which uses the numbers
of items where the models disagree (i.e., the off-
diagonal elements in Table 1).
5 
McNemar’s test
assesses whether χ
2 
= 
(p
10
−p
01
)
2
p
10
+p
01 
is significant,
and if so, rejects the null hypothesis that the distri-
butions are the same.
the generic approach from Figure 2 for the purpose of illus-
tration. For all cases examined in this paper, simulations take
only minutes on a laptop.
5
Unpaired data (i.e., if two models are evaluated on differ-
ent data drawn from the same distribution) requires a different
approach, such as using a binomial test. See Appendix E.5 for
extended discussion.

M1 correct M1 incorrect
M2 correct both correct only M2 correct
M2 incorrect only M1 correct both incorrect
Table 1: A contingency table representing the distribu-
tion of possible outcomes for two models (M1 and M2).
Thus, for McNemar’s test, the relevant data gen-
erating process for simulations can be specified
in terms of the expected difference in accuracy
between the models, ∆
acc
, and P
a
, the expected
proportion of examples for which the models will
have the same outcome (i.e., both correct or both in-
correct). From these we can compute the expected
proportions of examples on which only one model
is correct (i.e., the off-diagonals in Table 1), and es-
timate power via the algorithm in Figure 2. Figure
3 illustrates how power increases with increased
sample size, effect size, and agreement rate.
6
0.00 0.02 0.04
acc
0.0
0.5
1.0
power
P
a 
= 0.70
0.00 0.02 0.04
acc
0.0
0.5
1.0
P
a 
= 0.95
n = 5000
n = 1000
n = 500
n = 250
n = 100
Figure 3: Power for comparing two classifiers on accu-
racy using paired data depends on the size of the test
set (n), the expected agreement (P
a
), and the expected
difference in accuracy (∆
acc
). The dashed line shows
80% power, often taken to be a minimal requirement.
3.2 Estimating parameters
In order to estimate the required parameters (P
a
and ∆
acc
), we consider three options: (1) use re-
sults on validation (dev) data; (2) fit a regression
based on historical data; (3) use middle-of-the-road
assumptions when lacking other information. Us-
ing these methods, we can then estimate power or
calculate the smallest effect that can be detected
with 80% power at α = 0.05 (or other thresh-
olds). Both to illustrate this process, and to provide
guidance for future work, we demonstrate these
approaches below using data from two widely-
used datasets for evaluating NLP models: SQuAD
2.0 (Rajpurkar et al., 2016, 2018) and the GLUE
benchmark (Wang et al., 2018).
6
Corresponding plots showing Type-M and Type-S er-
ror (Gelman and Carlin, 2014) are in Appendix B. To walk
through a numerical example, see Appendix C. For an interac-
tive example, see the accompanying online notebooks.
Using validation results: 
To the extent that we
expect performance on test data to match perfor-
mance on validation data (i.e., in the absence of
domain shift), paired performance on validation
data (i.e., difference in accuracy and agreement
rate) provides one method for estimating power
when comparing against a baseline model.
To illustrate this, from the authors of SQuAD 2.0,
we obtain the pairwise agreement rates between all
models submitted to the leaderboard on both valida-
tion and test data. We find a very strong correlation
between validation and test for both pairwise accu-
racy differences (∆
acc
) and agreement rates (P
a
)
(r = 0.99 for both, as shown in Figure 9 in Ap-
pendix D, with results on validation data included
in the accompanying online materials), suggesting
we can use paired predictions on validation data
for power calculations when we have access to the
predictions from both models. Note that this ap-
proach assumes that the dev and test data have been
drawn from the same distribution, and that dev per-
formance has not been artificially inflated (such as
by training on validation data directly).
Using historical data: When one does not have
access to the baseline model or an informative prior,
one can make use of historical trends. That is, we
can try to estimate what a typical improvement will
look like, given the current state of the art (SOTA).
To illustrate this approach, we collect reported re-
sults for both SQuAD 2.0 and GLUE, and fit re-
gressions to estimate ∆
acc 
and P
a
. Given these
parameters, we can assess the likely power and
MDE for a typical model improvement against a
given baseline accuracy level.
To fit a regression to predict typical improve-
ments to SOTA, we gather data from GLUE papers
and manually label 119 accuracy comparisons and
57 claims of improvement (as denoted by bolding
of a result and a claim of SOTA in text) across 14
papers (selected as being at or above the BERT
score on the GLUE leaderboard with an accompa-
nying paper). In regressing ∆
acc 
on baseline accu-
racy and task, we achieve an R
2 
= 0.69, which is
not a perfect fit, but still provides a prior on likely
effect size. Similarly, we achieve an R
2 
= 0.67
when fitting a regression to SOTA improvements
on the SQuAD 2.0 leaderboard (selected as being
a significant improvement in time-ordered submis-
sions). See Appendix E.2.1 for more details.
To assess power for McNemar’s test, we must
also fit a regression predicting the expected overlap

between the models (P
a
). To fit such a regres-
sion, from GLUE authors we obtain the model test
set predictions on all tasks from a set of 10 high-
performing models, which allows us to measure the
extent to which their predictions overlap with each
other. Using GLUE tasks which measure accuracy,
we regress P
a 
on baseline accuracy and ∆
acc
, and
achieve an R
2 
of 0.97.
7 
Repeating this for SQuAD
2.0, we get an R
2 
of 0.94. See Appendix E.2 for
regression coefficients and additional details.
Typical improvements on popular tasks tend to
be small (see mean improvements in Table 2). Ex-
cept for rare transformative work, such as BERT
(Devlin et al., 2019), it is generally difficult to do
much better than a previous SOTA and thus im-
provements are likely to follow a trend, which is
why we are able to use historical data as a guide.
In cases where such data is not available or cannot
be trusted, other methods are necessary.
No prior: 
If no informative prior is available and
the baseline model or can’t be used for comparison
on a validation set, then we must fall back on mid-
dle of the road assumptions. Lachenbruch (1992)
provides a suggested default prior, and we find that
MDEs using this method are very similar to those
found by using the regression based approach. Ap-
pendix E.3 provides more details, and Table 9 in
the appendix presents the comparison.
3.3 Assessing power in the literature
Using the regression-based approach of estimat-
ing ∆
acc 
and P
a 
described above, we estimate the
MDE for each individual accuracy-based GLUE
task in comparison to current SOTA, and report
the average effect size of results which claimed
improvements. Table 2 summarizes these results,
showing for each dataset the size of the test set, the
accuracy of the best performing model on each task
at the time of writing, the estimated MDE to have
80% power using our regression to predict overlap
(P
a
), and the average reported difference from their
respective baselines.
As can be seen in Table 2, the mean reported
effect size (|∆
acc
|) is well below the estimated
MDE for the three smallest test sets – WNLI,
MRPC, and SST-2. Because this mean is based
7
WNLI (Levesque et al., 2012), MRPC (Dolan and Brock-
ett, 2005), SST-2 (Socher et al., 2013), RTE (Dagan et al.,
2005; Bar-Haim et al., 2006; Giampiccolo et al., 2007;
Bentivogli et al., 2009), QNLI (Rajpurkar et al., 2016)
MNLI (Williams et al., 2018), and QQP (Iyer et al., 2017).
For consideration of other metrics, see Appendix F.
Dataset Size SOTA (%) Est. MDE (%) |∆
acc
| (%)
WNLI 147 94.5 +5.26 +1.72
MRPC 1,725 92.0 +1.62 +0.63
SST-2 1,821 97.2 +1.02 +0.57
RTE 3,000 91.7 +1.23 +3.89
QNLI 5,463 97.5 +0.55 +1.31
MNLI-m 9,796 91.6 +0.67 +0.97
MNLI-mm 9,847 91.3 +0.68 +1.29
QQP 390,965 91.0 +0.11 +0.36
SQuAD 2.0 8,862 90.7 +0.56 +2.23
†
Table 2: Estimated minimum detectable effect (MDE)
using a regression-based estimate of likely agreement
with leaderboard SOTA as of May 6th, 2020. |∆
acc
| is
the average improvement over baseline per task among
surveyed papers that claimed SOTA. For future com-
parisons, unless the expected improvement is larger
than the estimated MDE, an experiment is unlikely to
be adequately powered, and researchers should instead
choose a different (larger) dataset. Note that this likely
applies to the vast majority of experiments on WNLI,
MRPC, and SST-2, based on recent trends. † indicates
that the SQuAD 2.0 average was based on leaderboard
improvements, which weren’t necessarily reported in a
publication. See Appendix E for full table and details.
on models comparing to even weaker baselines, we
would expect most future improvements to be even
smaller. Thus, most future experiments involving
these three datasets will not have adequate power
to test for improvements over the current SOTA
in the way that they are routinely used. Moreover,
alternative analyses give even more pessimistic es-
timates of likely improvements relative to MDE, as
described in Appendix E.4. If an experiment does
show significant improvement on a dataset such as
MRPC, the potential for Type-M error should make
us skeptical that this improvement will generalize
to new data from the same domain.
While the above results are informative about
future experiments, we would also ideally like to
know about the power of past experiments. Most of
the papers from which we collected results did not
report a significance test on the test set. Here we
estimate the expected power and predicted result of
such a test using leave-one-out regressions, where
we make a prediction for each reported improve-
ment using all other reported model comparisons.
This procedure reveals that only 46% would have
predicted adequate power (using estimates for
expected improvement and agreement), and ap-
proximately 51% would have been significant
(based on estimated agreement and reported im-
provement). Approximately 80% of experiments
with at least 80% power would also have been

found to be significant (37% of all comparisons).
In part because performance on many of these
tasks is now so good, a large expected improve-
ment is required in order for a new experiment
to have 80% power, suggesting that larger test set
sizes may be necessary to continue making well-
powered claims of SOTA improvement on individ-
ual tasks. For any comparisons which are likely to
be underpowered, we should refrain from placing
much emphasis on obtaining small improvements
over the previously reported best model. In extreme
cases, such as MRPC and SST-2, it is worth con-
sidering whether it is time to retire these datasets
as the basis for model comparison.
8
4 Machine Translation
To show how our approach to power analysis can
be applied to a more difficult setting, we consider
automated evaluation of machine translation us-
ing BLEU scores (Papineni et al., 2002). As with
accuracy, we would like to know what scale of im-
provements can be detected with reasonable power
on typical test sets. This setting is more compli-
cated because (1) BLEU is a corpus-level metric,
rather than being averaged across instances, and
(2) typical models are trained on vast amounts of
parallel data, with little data available that has not
been used in training, making it difficult to estimate
variation in performance.
Significance testing for BLEU: To test for a sig-
nificant difference between two MT models we use
the randomization test, as recommended in Dror
et al. (2018): given the paired output translations
from both models, swap the outputs for a random
subset of test examples and compute the resulting
difference in BLEU. Repeating this thousands of
times gives us a null distribution, which can be used
to test the observed difference between models.
Generative process for simulations: If large
amounts of untouched evaluation data were avail-
able, we could approach power analysis by simply
evaluating BLEU score on many random subsets
of n sentences, and computing the mean and vari-
ance of each system. Unfortunately, because MT
depends on parallel text (most of which is used in
training), evaluation data tends to be scarce. In-
8
It is also worth exploring power with respect to claims of
improvement on multiple tasks with a single model (Dem 
ˇ
sar,
2006), rather than each task individually. We leave considera-
tion of this as an interesting direction for future work.
stead, we introduce a generative process that can
produce the necessary inputs for power analysis.
For intuition, note that if we swap the i
th 
pair of
model outputs (as is done in the randomization test),
leaving rest as they are, we change the difference
in BLEU between models by a specific amount,
δ
i
, which we call the effect of making that swap.
While these individual effects are not independent
of each other due to the corpus-level nature of the
metric, in practice, the sum of individual effects
closely approximates the net effect of swapping
entire subsets (see Figure 15 in Appendix G).
Based on analyzing several models and datasets,
we find the typical distribution of these individual
effects can be approximated using a mixture of a
Delta distribution at zero, and a Laplace distribu-
tion (see Appendix G for details). Concretely, if
we assume ∆
B 
is the expected difference in BLEU
between two models on a dataset of n examples,
and P
0 
is the expected proportion of examples for
which δ
i 
= 0, we can simulate a dataset {δ
i
}
n
i=1 
of
n individual effects using the following process:
with probability P
0
, δ
i 
= 0. With probability
1 − P
0
, δ
i 
∼ Laplace(μ, b), where μ = 
−2·∆
B
n(1−P
0
) 
,
b = b
0
/n, and b
0 
is a user-specified parameter that
controls the variance, independent of the sample
size. By construction, E[
∑
n
i=1 
δ
i
] = −2 · ∆
B 
.
9
Given this generative process, we can then esti-
mate power using the Algorithm in Figure 2. On
each iteration, draw a simulated dataset from the
generative process, compute the observed differ-
ence between models as 
ˆ
∆
B 
= − 
1
2
∑
n
i=1 
δ
i
, and
test if this is significantly different from zero using
a modified randomization test, in which we assume
that the net effect of swapping a subset of instances
is simply the sum of the δ
i
’s in the subset. (Please
see online materials for an interactive example).
Empirical estimates: In order to estimate rea-
sonable values for the required parameters, we use
several pretrained models from the FAIRSEQ library
(Ott et al., 2019) for the WMT English-German
translation task. We evaluate these models on the
shared task test sets from 2016-2019 and compute
BLEU scores using SACREBLEU (Post, 2018). Fit-
ting a Delta-Laplace mixture to the effects of swap-
ping individual output pairs, we estimate values for
ˆ
P
0 
and 
ˆ
b
0
, reported in Table 3. (See also Figure
16 in Appendix G; code for computing estimates is
provided in the online materials).
9
Note that swapping all n examples would reverse the
model scores, equivalent to a net effect of −2 · ∆
B 
.

M1 M2 Test set n ∆
B 
ˆ
P
0 
ˆ
b
0
TF19
∗ 
TF18
∗ 
2019 2K 4.3 0.19 23.7
TF18 TF16 2018 3K 4.2 0.09 29.4
TF16 Conv17 2017 3K 1.3 0.12 22.5
TF16 Conv14 2016 3K 7.6 0.10 27.6
Table 3: Relevant parameters from four MT evalu-
ations. TF are Transformer-based (Ott et al., 2018;
Edunov et al., 2018; Ng et al., 2019) and Conv are Con-
volutional models (Gehring et al., 2017) from FAIRSEQ.
Test sets are from WMT shared tasks for En-De transla-
tion. ∆
B 
is the reported difference in BLEU, whereas
ˆ
P
0 
and 
ˆ
b
0 
are estimated. * indicates ensembles.
100 200 500 1000 2000 5000
sample size (n)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
power
P
0 
= 0.13, b
0 
= 25.8
Diff in BLEU
B 
= 5.0
B 
= 4.0
B 
= 3.0
B 
= 2.0
B 
= 1.0
B 
= 0.5
Figure 4: Power analysis for MT, showing how power
increases with n and ∆
B 
, using an average of fitted val-
ues for P
0 
and b
0
. Based on this analysis, we expect
that an experiment with a test set of 2000 sentences
would have approximately 75% power to detect a dif-
ference of 1 BLEU point as significant. For additional
plots, refer to Figure 17 in Appendix G.
While far from identical, the four comparisons,
each representing different stages of model evo-
lution, all produce similar estimates. Although
these estimates are only based on a single language
pair, the models and test sets are relatively diverse,
and we expect that these estimates will generalize,
though better estimates could be obtained by fitting
this distribution to a new domain of interest.
Using these estimates, we can now characterize
how much power test sets of different test set sizes
(n) would have for a range of possible differences
in BLEU (∆
B 
). Figure 4 shows this for P
0 
and b
0
set to the average of the observed values.
10 
Based
on this estimate, we conclude that for typical MT
test sets of around 2,000 examples, an improve-
ment of 1 BLEU point can likely be detected with
approximately 75% power. As shown in Figure 4
this power level increases dramatically with sample
size and effect size.
This analysis has served, in part, to show how a
simulation-based approach to power analysis can
10
For a sensitivity analysis of how power varies under dif-
ferent assumptions for P
0 
and b
0
, please see Figure 17 in
Appendix G.
be adapted to virtually any task. Additional work is
required to test how well these specific parameter
estimates will generalize, but the same process can
easily be adapted to new language pairs. More
generally, there would be great value in the MT
community curating larger held-out test sets, both
to validate this analysis, and for better powered
future comparison.
5 Likert-Scale Human Evaluations
Tasks such as natural language generation are diffi-
cult to evaluate using automated methods; as such,
human evaluations are central to NLP. Past work
has reported great variation in how human evalua-
tions are done (van der Lee et al., 2019). Therefore,
we begin with a meta-analysis of a subset of human
evaluation experiments from EMNLP 2019, which
we then use as the basis for claims about the power
of human evaluations in NLP more generally.
5.1 Meta-analysis
To characterize the state of human evaluation in
NLP, we identified papers from the main session
of EMNLP 2019 that made use of human evalu-
ations (details in Appendix H.2). To generalize
across studies, we restrict our analysis to Likert-
scale comparisons, which was the most commonly
reported type of evaluation. We extracted all cases
where a new model was being compared to the
best-performing baseline on one more metrics (117
comparisons from 41 papers) and normalized all
ratings to be on a 0-1 scale.
One takeaway from this meta-analysis is that the
reported effect sizes (that is, difference between
the novel model and the best-performing baseline)
vary widely ( s.d. = .12 on a [0, 1] scale). Number
of items tested is more consistent: 69% used 100
or fewer, and only 18% used over 200. But, as sim-
ilarly found by van der Lee et al. (2019), many key
details were not reported in this sample of exper-
iments. Most commonly missing was number of
ratings per item (34% of all experiments), followed
by total number of workers (28%). For 7% of ex-
periments, we could not determine the number of
items tested. 57% of experiments collected 3 anno-
tations per item, which was also the modal number
of unique annotators. Thus, it is often difficult to
ascertain, for any particular experiment, the details
of the experimental setting that are necessary to
evaluate the validity of the results.
Because the number of items rated was the most

0 200 400 600 800 1000
Number of items
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Effect size
Figure 5: Scaled effect size vs. number of items from
our EMNLP 2019 survey, showing higher variance in
the smallest samples. There is a slight negative correla-
tion, though it is not significant. As can be seen, most
experiments are small (n ≤ 100).
commonly reported, we use that as our proxy for
sample size. Figure 5 shows scaled mean difference
between models as a function of number of items.
As expected, we see greater variance in effects with
smaller samples since, with smaller samples, we
expect greater noise. We also observe a slight neg-
ative correlation between effect size and sample
size. That is, as sample size gets larger (and, thus,
as estimates get more precise), the estimated effect
size gets smaller. This trend is sometimes used as
an indication of publication bias (censoring of null
and opposite-direction effects) since, in a sample
with no publication bias, the effect size should be
independent of the sample size (Begg and Mazum-
dar, 1994). However, in our case, this correlation is
not significant (Kendall’s τ = −.07, p = .32) and
so it is difficult to draw strong conclusions.
11
5.2 Power analysis for human Likert ratings
What kind of effect sizes can typical human evalu-
ation experimental designs detect? As in previous
sections, we can use simulations to explore how
many annotators and/or instances should be used
to have sufficient power.
Simulating human experiments is conceptually
simple (e.g., m raters each rate n generated sen-
tence on overall quality), but for realistic simula-
tions, we need to consider variation in items (some
generated sentences are better than others), and
variation by rater (some raters use higher ratings
and/or respond to different aspects of quality), as
well as the overall difference in quality between
models. A simulation which treated all workers as
identical would fail to capture this variation, and
hence might overestimate power (Barr et al., 2013).
11
We exclude from this analysis two large negative effects
with N = 500 which would exaggerate this correlation.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
power
High variance
3 workers
High variance
10 workers
500 items
100 items
50 items
0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
mean difference
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
power
Low variance
0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
mean difference
Low variance
Figure 6: Using parameters estimated with mixed ef-
fects models from a high variance setting (top) and
a low variance setting (bottom), the left panel shows
simulated experiments with 3 workers annotating each
item, the right panel shows an unusually high number
of annotators per item (10 workers). Under typical as-
sumptions, many common experimental settings (e.g.,
3 workers and 100 items) are underpowered.
Unfortunately, details such as worker variance
are rarely reported in published papers. To better
characterize the typical variation in human evalua-
tions, we rely on a convenience sample of several
large datasets to estimate these parameters and use
them in our simulations as a proxy for what we
might observe in practice. Although focused on dif-
ferent tasks, all use a similar methodology, namely,
getting many Likert-scale annotations per instance
from many annotators and models (in some cases
as many as 20 ratings per item).
12
In order to extract estimates of these parameters
for our simulations, we use hierarchical mixed-
effects models, as used in psychology and other be-
havioral fields (Barr et al., 2013; Gelman and Hill,
2006). Such models incorporate variation in the
quality of generated instances, annotator responses,
and annotator sensitivity, and are recommended by
van der Lee et al. (2019) for analyzing human eval-
uations. (We provide details in Appendix H.3 and
include code for fitting such models as part of the
online materials). Using this approach, we obtain
an estimate of the relevant parameters from each of
the large datasets. From these, we choose sets of
parameters to be representative of experiments with
high or low variance, with full results in Appendix
H.3 (see Table 16 for parameter estimates).
As before, we then use these estimates to simu-
late data, assess significance on the simulated data
(here using mixed effect regression), and compute
power as a function of mean difference and sample
12
We use publicly available or author-provided data from
Hashimoto et al. (2019); Dathathri et al. (2020); Holtzman
et al. (2020), and WMT19 (links in Appendix H.2).

size.
13 
The resulting power estimates are shown
in Figure 6, plotted in terms of effect size, sample
size, and numbers of workers and items, for both
the high and low variance scenarios. From this
analysis, we highlight a few key takeaways:
• Many human evaluation studies are likely
underpowered: Using the “high variance” pa-
rameters (which are typical of most of the
datasets we used), the most common design at
EMNLP 2019 (3 workers, 100 items) is under-
powered unless the effect size is quite large
(0.2 or higher on the [0, 1] scale).
• Even with low variance, typical designs are
underpowered to detect small effects: Using
our estimated parameters for the low variance
setting, experiments will be underpowered to
detect small effects (0.05 on the [0, 1] scale),
unless an unusually large number of ratings
per item are collected (10+ for 100 items).
• 
Need for improved reporting: Most human
evaluations do not report enough detail to in-
terpret the results. This could be drastically
improved through basic power analyses, sig-
nificance testing using mixed-effects models,
and sharing of raw data.
Given our model estimates and simulations, we
conclude that, in aggregate, many human evalua-
tions are underpowered and would benefit from
larger sample sizes, particularly by using more
workers per item. Increased adoption of even ap-
proximate power calculations within the NLP com-
munity will promote thoughtful consideration of
appropriate sample sizes and improve the reliability
and replicability of results.
6 Overall Recommendations
• 
Power analyses should be done prior to eval-
uation when comparing against a baseline. If
a comparison is likely to be underpowered,
the pros and cons of running that evaluation
should be carefully considered. Underpow-
ered experiments do not provide convincing
evidence of progress.
• 
For new datasets and shared tasks, the num-
ber of instances in the test will determine the
13
These simulations require estimates for 7 parameters:
the baseline, the effect size, variance by worker, variance by
worker as a function of model, variance by item, variance by
item as a function of model, and residual variance.
minimum detectable effect size, and should
be chosen accordingly.
• For tasks which no longer have adequate
power to detect typical improvements (e.g.,
MRPC and SST-2), authors should consider
expanding the test set or retiring the task.
• To facilitate future power calculation and sig-
nificance tests, model owners should release
final fine-tuned model checkpoints. Alterna-
tively, leaderboard owners may wish to make
validation set predictions from all submitted
models publicly available.
• For human evaluations, (anonymized) raw
data should be shared, along with parameters
and code to replicate the analysis, including
proper significance testing. Prior to collect-
ing human evaluation data, researchers should
create an analysis plan and run power analy-
ses to determine an appropriate sample size
(likely requiring more workers and items than
is currently typical in NLP).
7 Conclusion
Recent progress in NLP has been extraordinarily
rapid, sometimes at the cost of experimental rigor.
In this paper, we have presented evidence that un-
derpowered experiments are widespread in NLP.
For comparisons based on small samples, there is
little reason to think that such an evaluation could
reliably provide evidence of a significant improve-
ment, and good reason to believe that improve-
ments found to be significant will exaggerate or
reverse the true effect. Going forward, a combi-
nation of larger test sets, simple power analyses,
and wider sharing of code, data, and experimental
details will help to build the foundation for a higher
standard of experimental methodology in NLP.
Acknowledgments
Toyota Research Institute (“TRI”) provided funds
to assist the authors with their research but this ar-
ticle solely reflects the opinions and conclusions of
its authors and not TRI or any other Toyota entity.
Thanks to Sam Bowman, Amanpreet Singh, Kevin
Clark, Naman Goyal, and Colin Raffel for pro-
viding data from submissions to the GLUE leader-
board, as well as Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Sumanth
Dathathri, Ari Holtzman, Hannah Rashkin, and
Nikita Srivatsan for providing raw human evalua-
tion data, not all of which made it into the paper.

References
Hua Ai, Antoine Raux, Dan Bohus, Maxine Eskenazi,
and Diane Litman. 2007. Comparing spoken dialog
corpora collected with recruited subjects versus real
users. In Proceedings SIGdial.
Frank J. Anscombe. 1954. Fixed-sample-size analysis
of sequential observations. Biometrics, 10:89–100.
Matthias G. Arend and Thomas Sch¨afer. 2019. Statis-
tical power in two-level models: A tutorial based
on Monte Carlo simulation. Psychological methods,
24(1):1–19.
Erfan Sadeqi Azer, Daniel Khashabi, Ashish Sabhar-
wal, and Dan Roth. 2020. Not all claims are created
equal: Choosing the right statistical approach to as-
sess hypotheses. In Proceedings of ACL.
Roy Bar-Haim, Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Lisa Ferro,
Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, and Idan
Szpektor. 2006. The second PASCAL recognising
textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of the
second PASCAL challenges workshop on recognis-
ing textual entailment.
Dale J. Barr, Roger Levy, Christoph Scheepers, and
Harry J. Tily. 2013. Random effects structure for
confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal.
Journal of Memory and Language, 68(3):255–278.
Colin B. Begg and Madhuchhanda Mazumdar. 1994.
Operating characteristics of a rank correlation test
for publication bias. Biometrics, 50(4):1088–1101.
Luisa Bentivogli, Peter Clark, Ido Dagan, and Danilo
Giampiccolo. 2009. The fifth PASCAL recogniz-
ing textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of
TAC.
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, David Burkett, and Dan
Klein. 2012. An empirical investigation of statisti-
cal significance in NLP. In Proceedings of EMNLP.
Katherine S. Button, John P. A. Ioannidis, Claire
Mokrysz, Brian A. Nosek, Jonathan Flint, Emma
S. J. Robinson, and Marcus R. Munaf`o. 2013. Power
failure: Why small sample size undermines the re-
liability of neuroscience. Nature Reviews Neuro-
science, 14(5):365–376.
Boxing Chen and Colin Cherry. 2014. A systematic
comparison of smoothing techniques for sentence-
level BLEU. In Proceedings of WMT.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Urvashi Khandelwal,
Christopher D. Manning, and Quoc V. Le. 2019a.
BAM! Born-again multi-task networks for natural
language understanding. In Proceedings of ACL.
Kevin Clark, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V. Le, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2019b. ELECTRA: Pre-
training text encoders as discriminators rather than
generators. In Proceedings of ICLR.
Jacob Cohen. 1962. The statistical power of abnormal-
social psychological research: A review. Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 65(3):145–153.
John E. Connett, Judith A. Smith, and Richard B.
McHugh. 1987. Sample size and power for pair-
matched case-control studies. Statistics in Medicine,
6(1):53–59.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2005. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Proceedings of the Machine Learning
Challenges Workshop.
Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane
Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason Yosinski, and
Rosanne Liu. 2020. Plug and play language models:
A simple approach to controlled text generation. In
Proceedings of ICLR.
Janez Demˇsar. 2006. Statistical comparisons of classi-
fiers over multiple data sets. J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
7:1–30.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of NAACL.
Thomas G. Dietterich. 1998. Approximate statistical
tests for comparing supervised classification learn-
ing algorithms. Neural computation, 10(7):1895–
1923.
Jesse Dodge, Suchin Gururangan, Dallas Card, Roy
Schwartz, and Noah A. Smith. 2019. Show your
work: Improved reporting of experimental results.
In Proceedings of EMNLP.
William B. Dolan and Chris Brockett. 2005. Automati-
cally constructing a corpus of sentential paraphrases.
In Proceedings of the Third International Workshop
on Paraphrasing (IWP2005).
Rotem Dror, Gili Baumer, Segev Shlomov, and Roi Re-
ichart. 2018. The hitchhiker’s guide to testing statis-
tical significance in natural language processing. In
Proceedings of ACL.
Stephen W. Duffy. 1984. Asymptotic and exact power
for the McNemar test and its analogue with R con-
trols per case. Biometrics, 40:1005–1015.
Sergey Edunov, Myle Ott, Michael Auli, and David
Grangier. 2018. Understanding back-translation at
scale. In Proceedings of EMNLP.
Morten W. Fagerland, Stian Lydersen, and Petter Laake.
2013. The McNemar test for binary matched-pairs
data: mid-p and asymptotic are better than exact con-
ditional. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 13.
Cristina Garbacea, Samuel Carton, Shiyan Yan, and
Qiaozhu Mei. 2019. Judge the judges: A large-scale
evaluation study of neural language models for on-
line review generation. In Proceedings of EMNLP.

Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis
Yarats, and Yann N. Dauphin. 2017. Convolutional
sequence to sequence learning. In Proceedings of
ICML.
Andrew Gelman. 2019. Don’t calculate post-hoc
power using observed estimate of effect size. An-
nals of Surgery, 269(1):e9–e10.
Andrew Gelman and John Carlin. 2014. Beyond power
calculations: Assessing type S (sign) and type M
(magnitude) errors. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 9(6):641–651.
Andrew Gelman and Jennifer Hill. 2006. Data Anal-
ysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical
Models. Cambridge University Press.
Andrew Gelman and Eric Loken. 2013. The garden
of forking paths: Why multiple comparisons can
be a problem, even when there is no “fishing expe-
dition” or “p-hacking” and the research hypothesis
was posited ahead of time.
Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan,
and Bill Dolan. 2007. The third PASCAL recogniz-
ing textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of
the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment
and Paraphrasing.
Yvette Graham, Nitika Mathur, and Timothy Baldwin.
2014. Randomized significance tests in machine
translation. In Proceedings of WMT.
Tatsunori B Hashimoto, Hugh Zhang, and Percy Liang.
2019. Unifying human and statistical evaluation
for natural language generation. In Proceedings of
NAACL.
John M. Hoenig and Dennis M. Heisey. 2001. The
abuse of power: The pervasive fallacy of power cal-
culations for data analysis. The American Statisti-
cian, 55(1):19–24.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin
Choi. 2020. The curious case of neural text degener-
ation. In Proceedings of ICLR.
John P. A. Ioannidis. 2019. What have we (not) learnt
from millions of scientific papers with P values?
The American Statistician, 73(sup1):20–25.
John P. A. Ioannidis, T. D. Stanley, and Hristos Doucou-
liagos. 2017. The power of bias in economics re-
search. The Economic Journal, 127(605):F236–
F265.
Shankar Iyer, Nikhil Dandekar, and Korn´el Csernai.
2017. First Quora dataset release: Question pairs.
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for
machine translation evaluation. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.
Helena C. Kraemer and Christine Blasey. 2015. How
Many Subjects?: Statistical Power Analysis in Re-
search. SAGE.
Peter A Lachenbruch. 1992. On the sample size for
studies based upon McNemar’s test. Statistics in
Medicine, 11(11):1521–1525.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman,
Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut.
2020. ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised
learning of language representations. In Proceed-
ings of ICLR.
Chris van der Lee, Albert Gatt, Emiel van Miltenburg,
Sander Wubben, and Emiel Krahmer. 2019. Best
practices for the human evaluation of automatically
generated text. In Proceedings of INLG.
Hector J. Levesque, Ernest Davis, and Leora Morgen-
stern. 2012. The Winograd schema challenge. In
Proceedings of KR.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du,
Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov.
2019. ROBERTA: A robustly optimized BERT pre-
training approach. Computing Research Repository,
arXiv:1907.11692.
R. Thomas McCoy, Junghyun Min, and Tal Linzen.
2019. BERTs of a feather do not generalize to-
gether: Large variability in generalization across
models with similar test set performance. Comput-
ing Research Repository, arXiv:1911.02969.
Blakeley B. McShane, David Gal, Andrew Gelman,
Christian Robert, and Jennifer L. Tackett. 2019.
Abandon statistical significance. The American
Statistician, 73(sup1):235–245.
Nathan Ng, Kyra Yee, Alexei Baevski, Myle Ott,
Michael Auli, and Sergey Edunov. 2019. Facebook
FAIR’s WMT19 news translation task submission.
In Proceedings of WMT.
Daniel J. O’Keefe. 2007. Brief report: Post hoc power,
observed power, a priori power, retrospective power,
prospective power, achieved power: Sorting out ap-
propriate uses of statistical power analyses. Commu-
nication Methods and Measures, 1(4):291–299.
Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, Alexei Baevski, Angela
Fan, Sam Gross, Nathan Ng, David Grangier, and
Michael Auli. 2019. FAIRSEQ: A fast, extensible
toolkit for sequence modeling. In Proceedings of
NAACL.
Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, David Grangier, and
Michael Auli. 2018. Scaling neural machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of WMT.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of ACL.
Jason Phang, Thibault F´evry, and Samuel R Bow-
man. 2018. Sentence encoders on STILTs: Supple-
mentary training on intermediate labeled-data tasks.
Computing Research Repository, arXiv:1811.01088.

Matt Post. 2018. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU
scores. In Proceedings of WMT.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Kather-
ine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2019. Exploring
the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-
text transformer. Computing Research Repository,
arXiv:1910.10683.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques-
tions for SQuAD. In Proceedings of ACL.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.
Stefan Riezler and John T. Maxwell. 2005. On some
pitfalls in automatic evaluation and significance test-
ing for MT. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop
on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for
Machine Translation and/or Summarization.
Jeffrey D. Scargle. 1999. Publication bias: The “file-
drawer” problem in scientific inference. arXiv,
arXiv:physics/9909033.
James J. Schlesselman. 1982. Case-control studies:
Design, conduct, analysis. Oxford University Press.
Roy Schwartz, Jesse Dodge, Noah A. Smith, and Oren
Etzioni. 2019. Green AI. Computing Research
Repository, arXiv:1907.10597.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Y. Ng,
and Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep mod-
els for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
treebank. In Proceedings of EMNLP.
Anders Søgaard, Anders Johannsen, Barbara Plank,
Dirk Hovy, and Hector Mart´ınez Alonso. 2014.
What’s in a p-value in NLP? In Proceedings
CoNLL.
Samy Suissa and Jonathan J. Shuster. 1991. The 2 x 2
matched-pairs trial: Exact unconditional design and
analysis. Biometrics, 47(2):361–372.
Denes Szucs and John P. A. Ioannidis. 2017. Empiri-
cal assessment of published effect sizes and power
in the recent cognitive neuroscience and psychology
literature. PLoS biology, 15(3).
Eric-Jan Wagenmakers. 2007. A practical solution to
the pervasive problems of p values. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 14:779–804.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2018.
GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis plat-
form for natural language understanding. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on BlackboxNLP.
Jacob Westfall, David A. Kenny, and Charles M. Judd.
2014. Statistical power and optimal design in ex-
periments in which samples of participants respond
to samples of stimuli. Journal of Experimental
Pyschology: General, 143(5):2020–2045.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R. Bow-
man. 2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
sentence understanding through inference. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Russ R. Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V. Le.
2019. XLNet: Generalized autoregressive pretrain-
ing for language understanding. In Proceedings of
NeurIPS.
Georgios N. Yannakakis and H´ector P. Mart´ınez. 2015.
Ratings are overrated! Frontiers in ICT, 2.

A Further Discussion of Significance
Testing, Power Analysis, and Post-Hoc
Analysis
Null hypothesis significance testing: 
In this pa-
per, we work within the framework of null hy-
pothesis significance testing (NHST). NHST is not
free from problems, in that certain systematic pro-
cesses within the practice of scientific research and
publishing can undermine its advantages, many of
which have been explored in the literature (Gelman
and Loken, 2013; Ioannidis, 2019; McShane et al.,
2019). Nevertheless, it would be premature to dis-
card the entire paradigm, and we believe there is
still some value in considering power within NHST
for several reasons.
First, despite its flaws, NHST remains a com-
monly used experimental framework in NLP re-
search. Whether implicit of explicit, most experi-
mental comparisons in the NLP literature have the
structure of an experiment in the NHST framework,
where having equivalent performance to an exist-
ing baseline is treated as a null hypothesis and the
new model is argued to be significantly better (the
typical case) or significantly worse (far rarer). But,
whereas many fields that run experiments have stan-
dardized procedures for assessing statistical signif-
icance, NLP papers vary as to how formally they
use a hypothesis testing framework to evaluate their
results (Berg-Kirkpatrick et al., 2012; van der Lee
et al., 2019; Azer et al., 2020).
Second, when done properly, NHST does pro-
vide a convenient way of summarizing results. Im-
provements in overall methdology, such as sharing
code and data, sensitivity analyses, greater inter-
est in null findings, and even pre-registration can
vastly improve the validity of this paradigm, and
we are seeing adoption of some of these practices
within NLP.
Finally, there is also a great need for additional
clarity with respect to precisely what claims are
being made by NLP papers. In this work, we are
primarily focused on claims made about trained
models (i.e. in testing whether one particular in-
stantiation of a model is significantly better than a
particular instantiation of another model). It is, of
course, also important to consider broader claims
that might be made, such as about expected per-
formance or computational budget (Dodge et al.,
2019; Schwartz et al., 2019), and everything we
have to say can be extended to incorporate such
considerations. For the purpose of clarity, how-
ever, we restrict ourselves to the simplest sort of
statistical claim.
Power and power analyses: The probability
that a statistical test will reject the null hypothesis
in an experiment is a function of several parameters,
some of which are typically known or controllable,
such as the sample size and significance threshold,
and some of which are unknown, such as the details
about exactly how models differ. Power tells us
what this probability would be, if we knew the true
values for these unknown parameters. Conditional
on a particular difference existing (e.g. an expected
difference in accuracy between two models for a
particular data distribution), along with a statistical
test, a significance threshold, power is the proba-
bility that the test will reject the null hypothesis
and find the observed difference to be significant.
In common statistical terminology, power is one
minus the probability of false negatives in rejecting
the null hypothesis or type II error.
While we will not, in general, know what the
true power of an experiment is, by making reason-
able assumptions, we can try to choose appropriate
values for those parameters that we can control. By
making assumptions about what we expect to ob-
serve, we can obtain estimates of how much power
a test is likely to have, which may lead us to modify
our experimental design, such as by increasing the
sample size.
Importantly, proper experiment design requires
specifying these parameters in advance of data col-
lection, or otherwise using a valid stopping rule.
One can always obtain a significant result by pro-
gressively collecting data until a significant result
is found (“sampling to a foregone conclusion”),
but this is not a valid procedure (Anscombe, 1954;
Wagenmakers, 2007). Similarly, post-hoc power
analysis, using estimates derived from the exper-
iment itself, provides no additional information
beyond a transformation of the observed p-value,
and is thus not recommended (though see below).
Expanding on the algorithm in Figure 2, a
simulation-based power analysis involves the fol-
lowing:
1. 
First, determine the statistical test, T , which
will be used. For the example of comparing
models depicted in Figure 1, we will use the
binomial test to compare the systems (Dror
et al., 2018).
2. Come up with a generative process which

could be used to generate data like that which
we will collect. In this step, we need to
make assumptions about the comparison of
interest. Since the binomial test requires
only the counts of how many people prefer
each system, we need to specify a prior on
generating those counts. For example, we
might assume that 60% of people will prefer
system B, so the generative process will be
c
B 
∼ Binomial(p = 0.6, n), where n is the
total number of people to be sampled.
3. Choose a value of n for which we want to cal-
culate power. Repeatedly (e.g., 10,000 times)
draw many samples from our assumed gener-
ative process for that size of n .
4. For each simulated dataset of size n, run the
chosen statistical test to check if difference
between the observed counts is significant,
and compute the proportion that are found to
be significant. This is our estimate of power.
Note that more direct solutions for power analy-
sis do exist for some settings, such as this one (see
Appendix E.5 below).
Post-Hoc Power Analysis: Post-hoc power anal-
ysis is an issue when the true population effect has
variance to it (O’Keefe, 2007; Hoenig and Heisey,
2001; Gelman, 2019). In the case of NLP models,
there are several perspectives on the comparisons
which can lead to differences regarding how we
perceive post-hoc power analysis: (1) we are com-
paring one model vs. another on a particular test
set, the effect we see is the true population effect,
post-hoc power analysis is okay because it is de-
terministic; (2) we are comparing one model vs.
another on a data distribution from which the test
and dev set are drawn, post-hoc power is not okay;
(3) we are comparing one training algorithm vs.
another (including variance from both training pro-
cedures and test/dev set draws), post-hoc power
analysis is still not okay. We specifically look at
the case of (2). While (3) is interesting on its own,
this is not the typical comparison done (yet) in NLP
research and thus we do not have enough informa-
tion on reported training variance to investigate this
thoroughly here. The case of (1) is also atypical
as the authors of a study typically wish to draw
inferences about how well a model does on the true
data distribution (hence, why a dev and test set are
used).
B Type-M and Type-S errors
Although the most obvious risk of using underpow-
ered experiments is that there is a greater chance of
failing to detect a true effect, there is an additional
harm of using an underpowered design, which has
emerged in light of the replication crisis in science.
This can be most easily understood through the idea
of Type-M and Type-S error (Gelman and Carlin,
2014).
Type-M error is the extent to which an observed
difference exaggerates the true effect, conditional
on a finding being significant. Type-S error is
the probability that an observed difference has the
opposite sign of the true difference, again condi-
tional on a finding being significant. Even in a
low-powered experiment, there is some probability
of finding an effect to be significant; the lower the
power, however, the more likely it is that the ob-
served significant difference has the opposite sign
of the true effect, and the larger the degree to which
the magnitude of the observed effect will tend to
exaggerate the true effect.
Intuitively, if power is low, this means that the
sample size is small relative to the effect size. As
such, the difference will only be significant if an
atypically large effect is observed. Assuming the
use of a two-sided test, many of these significant
findings will also have the wrong sign, as they will
be nearly as likely to fall on either side of zero for
a symmetric distribution.
Type-M and Type-S error rates can be estimated
using the exact same process for power analysis
as described in Figure 2. To do so, we need only
augment the algorithm with these two additional
steps:
3. Type-S error ≈ 
∑
i:p
i
≤α
I[sign(e
i
)6=sign(e∗)]
|j:p
j 
≤α|
4. Type-M error ≈ 
∑
i:p
i
≤α
abs(e
i
)/abs(e
∗
)
|j:p
j 
≤α|
Figures 7 and 8 show scenarios for comparing
classifiers on accuracy, corresponding to Figure 3
in the main text, but showing expected Type-M
and Type-S error instead of power. As can be seen,
Type-M and Type-S error increase with smaller
sample sizes, smaller differences between models,
and lower agreement rates, all corresponding to
lower power.

0.00 0.02 0.04
acc
0
20
40
Type-M error
P
a 
= 0.70
0.00 0.02 0.04
acc
P
a 
= 0.95
n = 100
n = 250
n = 500
n = 1000
n = 5000
Figure 7: Type-M error (the factor by which observed
significant effects are likely to exaggerate the true ef-
fect) for comparing classifiers on accuracy increases
with smaller test sets (n), smaller differences between
models (∆
acc
), and smaller agreement rates (P
a
). Se-
vere exaggerations of differences between models are
likely with underpowered designs.
0.00 0.02 0.04
acc
0.0
0.2
0.4
Type-S error
P
a 
= 0.70
0.00 0.02 0.04
acc
P
a 
= 0.95
n = 100
n = 250
n = 500
n = 1000
n = 5000
Figure 8: Type-S error (the probability that significant
differences observed between models will have the op-
posite sign of the true difference) for comparing classi-
fiers increases with smaller test sets (n), smaller differ-
ences between models (∆
acc
), and smaller agreement
rates (P
a
). Sign errors become resaonably likely with
underpowered experiments.
C Numerical Example of a McNemar’s
Test Simulation
To provide a concrete example of comparing clas-
sifiers on accuracy, imagine that a test set for a
benchmark task has 500 instances. Based on prior
knowledge (see main paper), we might assume that
our proposed model will achieve, at most, an ab-
solute improvement of 2 percentage points over
the state of the art (∆
acc 
= 0.02), and that the
models are likely to agree on 90% of examples
(P
a 
= 0.9). We can convert these assumptions into
a distribution over outcomes which will define our
generative process. In particular, for a random un-
seen instance, these assumptions imply that there
is a 10% chance of a disagreement; the probability
that our model is correct and the old model is in-
correct is therefore 6%, and the opposite outcome
has a probability of 4% (giving us the assumed net
difference of 2%). Note that, because McNemar’s
test does not consider the on-diagonal elements, it
is not necessary that we explicitly define the base-
line accuracy. Thus, a valid probability distribution
M1 correct M1 incorrect
M2 correct 0.6 0.06
M2 incorrect 0.04 0.3
Table 4: A possible distribution corresponding to the
case where models M1 and M2 will agree on 90% of ex-
amples (P
a
) and M2 achieves a 2% improvement over
M1 (∆
acc
). Note that the on-diagonal terms here will
be dictated by the accuracy of M1 (or equivalently, by
M2), but for our purposes, only need to be non-negative
and sum to P
a 
for the sake of McNemar’s test, which
only looks at the off-diagonal elements.
for use in this simulations could be that shown in
Table 4.
By drawing many samples from this distribution
of size n = 500 and computing a p-value using
McNemar’s test for each, we obtain an estimate
that the power of this test is approximately 0.25
for a significance threshold of α = 0.05, which is
severely underpowered. This would also imply a
Type-M error factor of 1.9; we would expect that
a typical experiment that found the observed dif-
ference between models to be significant would
exaggerate the true difference of 0.02 by a factor
of 1.9, producing observed significant differences
between models on the order of 0.04, on average.
(See supplementary notebooks for calculations and
interactive demonstration). As such, we conclude
that this test set is too small to be able to reliably
evaluate whether or not our model is significantly
different from the state of the art, and should dis-
trust any observed differences that are significant,
unless we have poorly estimated the relevant pa-
rameters.
By contrast, if the test set contained 2000 exam-
ples, we would estimate the test to have nearly 80%
power, with a Type-M factor of only 1.1, and would
feel comfortable proceeding with and reporting on
this evaluation. Similarly, if we had reason to think
that our model represented a game-changing ad-
vance, and would achieve an improvement of 4
percentage points, or if we had reason to believe
that the models would agree on 97.5% of examples,
then we would have the power to evaluate this, even
with only 500 examples.
D SQuAD 2.0 Analysis and Results
From the authors of SQuAD 2.0, we obtained pair-
wise agreement statistics on the SQuAD 2.0 de-
velopment and test sets for all models that were
submitted to the SQuAD 2.0 leaderboard and had

publicly visible development set predictions on the
CodaLab platform. We removed six submissions
whose exact match (EM) scores on test data were
less than 50%; EM scores below 50% suggest a bug
or misconfiguration of the model for predicting on
the test set, as the majority baseline gets roughly
50% accuracy (by always predicting no-answer).
We also removed one submission whose develop-
ment set EM score was more than 20 points higher
than its test EM score, as it seemed likely that the
model had been trained on the development set.
After this filtering, we were left with 144 models.
Figure 9 shows the correlation between valida-
tion and test data for both pairwise accuracy dif-
ferences (∆
acc
) and agreement rates (P
a
) on the
SQuAD 2.0 leaderboard. As can be seen, these
correlate well, suggesting that measuring these
quantities on validation data can serve as a rea-
sonable guide when doing a power analysis for a
new model, though lower agreement rates on dev
data to tend to slightly underestimate agreement on
test. If the validation results are available for both
models, these can be used to compute estimates of
P
a 
and ∆
acc
, and these can be used to compute the
approximate power of the test set.
0.25 0.00 0.25
Validation 
acc 
(EM)
0.25
0.00
0.25
Test
 
acc
 
(EM)
 
r = 0.992
0.6 0.8 1.0
Validation agreeement (P
a
)
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Test agreement (
P
a
)
r = 0.995
Figure 9: Correlation between validation and test data
among all models submitted to the SQuAD 2.0 leader-
board for both pairwise accuracy differences (∆
acc 
us-
ing exact match (EM); left), and agreement rates (P
a
;
right). In both cases, Pearson correlation (r) is over
0.99. Dashed lines show y = x.
To verify that using these estimates provide a
reliable guide to power, we make use the predic-
tions made by SQuAD 2.0 submissions on both
validation and test data. In particular, if we as-
sume that each submission is being compared to
the previous model to demonstrate a significant
and well-powered improvement over the previous
baseline, we find that 19 out of 143 submissions
showed sufficient improvement on the validation
set to have at least 80% power (see Figure 10). Of
these, 14 (74%) attain a significant improvement
over the baseline on the test data (consistent with
the expected value of 80%). Of the remaining 124
submissions, 3 (2.5%) would show a significant
improvement over the baseline, but did not have
sufficient power based on validation performance.
Interestingly, while all other significant improve-
ments were generally well-spaced over time, these
three underpowered submissions were all beaten
by a new submissions within 5 days. As an aside,
we also note that the vast majority of submissions
are significantly worse than the current SOTA, rein-
forcing the notion that real improvements are rare,
and most improvements will be small.
0 5 10 15
Count
Sig. worse on test
No sig. difference
Sig. better on test
0
5
14
Dev improvement
with power > 80%
0 50 100
Count
105
16
3
Other
Figure 10: SQuAD 2.0 leaderboard submissions com-
pared to previous SOTA, where we require for SOTA
that submissions have 80% power (based on valida-
tion improvement and agreement), and a significant im-
provement on test data.
Caveats: Correlation between the effect size on
the validation and test sets may not always be so
high. Overconfidence in the power of your experi-
ment may thus occur if the validation performance
is greater than the test performance (as would be
the case if no regularization was used and extensive
hyperparameter tuning caused a model to overfit to
the validation set). Alternatively, if comparing to
a baseline with inflated performance on validation
data (for the same reasons as above), running power
analyses based purely on estimates from validation
data would underestimate power. As such, combin-
ing validation estimates with reasonable priors is
recommended.
E Accuracy
E.1 Data Collection
E.1.1 Model Predictions on Test Set and
Model Prediction Agreement
From the authors of the GLUE benchmark – as
well as authors of individual models – we obtain

the model test-set predictions on all tasks from a
set of 10 high-performing models, which allows
us to measure the extent to which their predictions
overlap with each other. We select GLUE tasks
which use accuracy as an evaluation metric. The
relevant tasks are MNLI (Williams et al., 2018),
MRPC (Dolan and Brockett, 2005), RTE (Dagan
et al., 2005; Bar-Haim et al., 2006; Giampiccolo
et al., 2007; Bentivogli et al., 2009), SST-2 (Socher
et al., 2013), QQP (Iyer et al., 2017), QNLI (Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2016), and WNLI (Levesque et al.,
2012). For consideration of other metrics, see Ap-
pendix F.
We use model predictions for: ELECTRA
(small, base, large, large with tricks) (Clark et al.,
2019b), XLNet (large) (Yang et al., 2019), T5 (Raf-
fel et al., 2019), ALBERT (large) (Lan et al.,
2020), BAM(large) (Clark et al., 2019a), RoBERTa
(large) (Liu et al., 2019), and BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019). We only had the model predictions available
and extrapolated overlap from that, we did not have
access to the models themselves, ground truth test
set labels, nor dev set predictions for the models.
E.1.2 Comparisons and Claims
We gather data from GLUE papers regarding the ac-
curacy tasks and manually label 119 comparisons
and 57 claims of improvement (as denoted within
a work by bolding of a new model’s number and
a claim of SOTA in the main text) across 14 pa-
pers (selected as being at or above the BERT score
on the GLUE leaderboard with an accompanying
publication). For each paper we examine if a spe-
cific comparison is made against a baseline that
isn’t claiming state of the art performance. For
example, the STILTs approach (Phang et al., 2018)
makes comparisons against non-SOTA baselines,
which we add to our labeling scheme but filter out
when fitting regressions to likely SOTA improve-
ments. We mark this as SOTA Comparison = N.
For claims of SOTA improvement, we examine
this as some textual basis for the claim (e.g., “we
drive state of the art performance on GLUE”) cou-
pled with bolding of values in a table reporting
baselines against the model under test. We mark
datapoints as Claim of Improvement = Y if they
are an improvement claim. We mark effect size as
the improvement from the best previous baseline
(the current SOTA) on the test set on a per-dataset
basis. We note that in several cases, worse results
on the new model were bolded. We treated this
as no claim of improvement. If results were not
bolded but still higher for the new model we also
treated this as no claim for improvement.
E.2 Regression-based approach to modeling
power and MDEs
E.2.1 Predicting overlap
There are several versions of McNemar’s test,
each with their own unique method for calculating
power, sample size, or minimum effect size. See,
for example, discussions in Schlesselman (1982),
Duffy (1984) Suissa and Shuster (1991), Connett
et al. (1987), Fagerland et al. (2013), and Lachen-
bruch (1992).
The methods for calculating sample size or
power by Connett et al. (1987); Schlesselman
(1982); Suissa and Shuster (1991) require making
an assumption about the odds ratio Φ = p
10
/p
01
as well as an estimate of the fraction of discordant
pairs (disagreements between two models).
Fagerland et al. (2013) suggest that the exact
unconditional version of the test by Suissa and
Shuster (1991) has desirable properties. Thus,
we use the implementation of the power calcula-
tions for this test from the https://github.com/
ekstroem/MESS package.
How do we make an assumption about the odds
ratio and fraction of discordant pairs? We first
fit an OLS regression to the existing models on
the GLUE leaderboard for all binary choice ac-
curacy tasks using the aforementioned predictions
provided by the leaderboard creators and individual
authors of models,
overlap
i 
= β
0 
+ β
1
min acc
i 
+ β
2
acc diff
i
, 
(1)
for all i that are a pairwise comparison between any
two models, min acc
i 
is the minimum accuracy be-
tween the two models under comparison, acc diff
i
is the gap between the two models, and overlap
i 
is
the fraction of overlapping predictions. We end up
with the model shown in Table 5.
We note that outcomes are biased toward a
higher range of accuracy values and may not be a
perfect prior. However, this does give us a fairly
good linear fit for top-of-the-leaderboard results.
We then can predict the expected overlap for a
given model as:
exp overlap =0.41 + 0.58 · min acc
− 0.47 · exp acc dif 
(2)
Note now we can make an assumption on the
expected fraction of discordant values and the odds

Dep. Variable: y R-squared: 0.966
Model: OLS Adj. R-squared: 0.966
Method: Least Squares F-statistic: 3820.
Date: Thu, 14 May 2020 Prob (F-statistic): 3.62e-197
Time: 07:03:28 Log-Likelihood: 818.14
No. Observations: 270 AIC: -1630.
Df Residuals: 267 BIC: -1619.
Df Model: 2
coef std err t P> |t| [0.025 0.975]
const 0.4142 0.019 21.694 0.000 0.377 0.452
min acc 0.5819 0.021 27.999 0.000 0.541 0.623
acc diff -0.4662 0.028 -16.625 0.000 -0.521 -0.411
Omnibus: 6.121 Durbin-Watson: 1.040
Prob(Omnibus): 0.047 Jarque-Bera (JB): 8.647
Skew: -0.108 Prob(JB): 0.0133
Kurtosis: 3.850 Cond. No. 71.5
Table 5: OLS Regression Results for predicting GLUE model overlap from baseline accuracy and effect size.
Dep. Variable: y R-squared: 0.944
Model: OLS Adj. R-squared: 0.933
Method: Least Squares F-statistic: 91.87
Date: Tue, 26 May 2020 Prob (F-statistic): 1.37e-07
Time: 06:05:23 Log-Likelihood: 36.368
No. Observations: 14 AIC: -66.74
Df Residuals: 11 BIC: -64.82
Df Model: 2
coef std err t P> |t| [0.025 0.975]
const 0.4339 0.091 4.786 0.001 0.234 0.633
min acc 0.5932 0.101 5.874 0.000 0.371 0.816
acc diff -1.2849 0.588 -2.186 0.051 -2.578 0.009
Omnibus: 0.299 Durbin-Watson: 2.022
Prob(Omnibus): 0.861 Jarque-Bera (JB): 0.163
Skew: 0.214 Prob(JB): 0.922
Kurtosis: 2.691 Cond. No. 140.
Table 6: OLS Regression Results for predicting SQuAD 2.0 model overlap.

60 70 80 90
Baseline Test EM
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Test % Agreement
R
2 
: 0.96507
70 80 90
Baseline Accuracy
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Test % Agreement
R
2 
: 0.96500
Figure 11: SQuAD 2.0 (top) and GLUE (bottom) %
agreement of new model vs. the accuracy of the base-
line in the comparison (assuming improvement in the
new model).
ratio, the latter being:
Φ = 
1 − exp overlap + exp acc diff
1 − exp overlap − exp acc diff 
(3)
This is all that is necessary for McNemar’s test
and thus we can then simply solve for the minimum
expect treatment effect for the given sample size of
the dataset and a power of 80%. Note that for QQP
we use the normal approximation rather than exact
unconditional test as the large sample size makes
the exact test intractable. See Duffy (1984).
We fit such a regression to GLUE tasks and
achieve an R
2 
of 0.97. Repeating this for SQuAD
2.0, we get an R
2 
of 0.94, with fit shown in Table
6. See Figure 11 for a plot indicating the level of
agreement plotted against baseline accuracy. See
also additional model comparisons for overlap in
Appendix I.
E.2.2 Predicting Effect Size
A similar regression can be run to predict the ex-
pected effect size given the baseline accuracy: how
much do models typically improve given the cur-
rent SOTA. To fit an OLS regression predicting this
value, we gather data from GLUE papers regarding
the accuracy tasks and manually label 119 compar-
isons and 57 claims of improvement (as denoted
within a work by bolding of a new model’s number
and a claim of SOTA in the main text) across 14 pa-
pers (selected as being at or above the BERT score
on the GLUE leaderboard with an accompanying
publication). We fit the regression:
̂
∆
i 
= β
0 
+ β
1
baseline
i 
+ 
ˆ
β
2
task
i
, (4)
to see how predictable the expected effect size is,
where
̂
 ∆
i 
is the predicted effect size, baseline
i 
is
the baseline model’s accuracy, and task
i 
is a cat-
egorical variable (in the regression this ends up
being a set of dummy variables for each category
so we denote 
ˆ
β to emphasize this). Note that for
SQuAD 2.0, we use a separate regression without
the task variable since it is a single-task leader-
board.
We achieve an R
2 
= 0.69 which is not a perfect
fit, but still provides a prior on likely effect size.
Similarly, we achieve an R
2 
= .67 when fitting a
regression to SOTA improvements on the SQuAD
2.0 leaderboard (selected as being a significant im-
provement in time-ordered submissions).
See Table 7 and Table 8 for regression coeffi-
cients and model fits. Figure 13 shows the per-task
distribution of effect sizes against baseline accu-
racies in GLUE papers for SOTA improvements.
Figure 12 shows the effect size distribution as a
histogram.
E.2.3 Caveats for Regression-based
Approach
Fitting a regression to predict overlap between a
baseline and a new model has a good linear fit.
However, this may not be the case for every dataset.
Additionally, predicting effect sizes via a linear fit
is not a perfect prior. The measurements of power
in this case are meant to simulate estimating power
before running evaluation on a test set, as running
power analysis using only the observed effect may
lead to the issues of post-hoc power estimation.
E.3 No Prior Approach (Lachenbruch, 1992)
What do you do if there is no prior data avail-
able (as in a new task) and so you cannot make
assumptions about discordant pairs or odds ra-
tio? Lachenbruch (1992) discusses this exact
problem in the context of clinical trials, and pro-
poses an alternative method based on the work of
(Connett et al., 1987) which allows you to make

Dependent variable:
effect.size
Previous.Best −0.264
∗∗∗
(0.032)
TaskMNLI-mm 0.150
(0.621)
TaskMRPC 0.023
(0.622)
TaskQNLI 2.139
∗∗∗
(0.639)
TaskQQP −0.195
(0.719)
TaskRTE 1.018
(0.628)
TaskSST-2 1.536
∗∗
(0.686)
TaskWNLI −0.520
(0.789)
Constant 24.342
∗∗∗
(2.837)
Observations 61
R
2 
0.690
Adjusted R
2 
0.642
Residual Std. Error 1.309 (df = 52)
F Statistic 14.455
∗∗∗ 
(df = 8; 52)
Note: 
∗
p<0.1; 
∗∗
p<0.05; 
∗∗∗
p<0.01
Table 7: OLS regression for predicting effect size for
GLUE tasks.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0 5 10
Accuracy Improvement
Density
Figure 12: The reported difference from the best per-
forming new model to the best performing baseline
in accuracy across all accuracy datasets in the GLUE
Benchmark. Note: unlike Table 10, we do not limit
these to claims of improvement, but only to papers
which introduce a new model and compare against
some baseline. Mean: +0.959 Std.Err.: 0.23
l
l
ll
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l 
l
l
l 
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l 
l
l
l
l
l
ll
l 
l
l
l 
l
ll
l 
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l 
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l 
l
l 
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l l 
l
l
l 
l 
l
l
l
l
l
l 
l
l
l
l
l 
l
l
l
0
5
10
50 60 70 80 90 100
Baseline Accuracy
Accuracy Improvement
Task 
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
MNLI−m
MNLI−mm
MRPC
QNLI
QQP
RTE
SST−2
WNLI
Figure 13: The effect size given the baseline model ac-
curacy observed across GLUE tasks. As the baseline
model moves toward the range of current GLUE sub-
missions, reported model gains decrease toward 0. Fit-
ting a regression yields an R
2 
= 0.69.
assumptions about potential marginal probabili-
ties, providing a midpoint value, as well as an
upper and lower bound. We use an implemen-
tation of this from: https://rdrr.io/rforge/
biostatUZH/man/sampleSizeMcNemar.html 
and
solve for the expected accuracy minimum given
a fixed dataset sample size and baseline accuracy
for each of the lower bound, midpoint, and upper
bound. In practice, we find the Lachenbruch (1992)
prior to be very close to the values we obtain from
the above regression (see Table 9). Importantly
this method requires no assumptions and is meant
to give an idea for whether it is worth pursuing a
study for the given size of the test set.
E.4 Extended Results
Table 9 contains additional MDE estimates using
a two-sample proportion test as in Appendix E.5,
the Lachenbruch (1992) methodology. We also
provide the standard errors and n for each average
effect size, the OLS regression predicting the next
effect size for a new SOTA
̂
 
∆
, and the current
difference from SOTA and next on the leaderboard.
We note that MDE calculations are roughly similar
except for the upper and lower bounds provided
in the Lachenbruch (1992) calculation. We also
note that predicted SOTA results are far lower than
past averages since the average includes early large
results like those of Devlin et al. (2019). We can
see that in some cases the predicted effect size

Dep. Variable: y R-squared: 0.672
Model: OLS Adj. R-squared: 0.644
Method: Least Squares F-statistic: 24.55
Date: Tue, 26 May 2020 Prob (F-statistic): 0.000334
Time: 06:05:23 Log-Likelihood: 45.711
No. Observations: 14 AIC: -87.42
Df Residuals: 12 BIC: -86.14
Df Model: 1
coef std err t P> |t| [0.025 0.975]
const 0.1331 0.023 5.910 0.000 0.084 0.182
x1 -0.1408 0.028 -4.955 0.000 -0.203 -0.079
Omnibus: 19.911 Durbin-Watson: 2.643
Prob(Omnibus): 0.000 Jarque-Bera (JB): 18.487
Skew: 1.995 Prob(JB): 9.68e-05
Kurtosis: 6.971 Cond. No. 17.3
Table 8: OLS Regression Results for predicting effect size from baseline accuracy for SQuAD 2.0 improvements.
is even smaller than the lowest bound MDE and
we may wish to consider the usefulness of further
comparisons on individual datasets in such cases.
E.5 Calculating Power or Sample Size with
Binomial Test
If we assume that samples are unpaired – the new
model and baseline evaluation samples are drawn
from the same data distribution but aren’t necessar-
ily the same samples – we can use a binomial test
for significance.
In this case, we assume that we have two models
and each draw brings a 1 if the model is correct or
0 if incorrect. We would like to use the two-sample
proportion test, and have two binomial distributions
with p
1 
and p
2 
as the mean probabilities. Our null
hypothesis is H
0 
: p
1 
= p
2
. We have an alternative
hypothesis (two sided) is H
1 
: p
1 
6
 
= p
2
. Note,
in R we can use the function power.prop.test() to
calculate power, the MDE, or the sample size of the
tests. See also a tutorial here: https://imai.fas.
harvard.edu/teaching/files/Handout9.pdf.
F Additional Metrics
In this appendix, we provide guidance on how we
might apply power analysis to metrics beyond what
is covered in the main paper.
Recall, Precision, F1, Matthew’s correlation:
While accuracy is the most commonly used metric
in the GLUE benchmark, other tasks make use of
other metrics such as F1 and Matthew’s correla-
tion. F1 is particularly relevant in cases of binary
classification where there is strong class imbalance,
such that even the baseline of predicting the most
common class will achieve high accuracy.
If we have good prior information, we can use an
approach akin to that recommended for accuracy,
but replacing McNemar’s test with a randomiza-
tion test (as used for machine translation, see § 4
in main paper). In particular, given an evaluation
on paired data (as is the case for all benchmark
datasets), one can test for a significant difference
between models in terms of F1 (or any other metric)
using a randomization test. That is, on each itera-
tion, we randomize the assignment of which model
each prediction came from for every instance with
probability 0.5, and compute the resulting overall
difference in F1. Repeating this thousands of times
gives us the null distribution, and we can then check
to see whether the observe difference in F1 is in
the tails of this distribution, which can thereby be
converted into a p-value (see Dror et al. (2018) for
more details).
Because F1 (and related metrics) cannot be rep-
resented as a simple sum over individual instances,
in order to completely specify a hypothetical data
generating process, we need to assume values for
all cells in the confusion matrix, per class. That
is for each class we would need to assume values
for the cells as shown in Table 11, where the rele-
vant distribution of predictions are for the instances
with the corresponding label, and the values for

Dataset Size SOTA MDE Binomial MDE (Lachenbruch, 1992) MDE regression
̂
 
∆ 
|∆| (std.err.,n) ∆
SOT A
WNLI 147 94.5% +5.38% +5.42%(5.36%, 5.45%) +5.26% -1.17% 1.72 (0.917, 4) 0.0%
MRPC 1725 92.0% +2.40% +1.91% (0.45%, 2.48%) +1.62% +0.03% +0.625 (0.234, 8) +0.6%
SST-2 1821 97.2% +1.34% +1.10% (0.43%,1.35%) +1.02% +0.18% +0.571 (0.197, 7) -0.3%
RTE 3000 91.7% +1.89% +1.48% (0.26%, 1.96%) +1.23% +1.11% +3.89 (1.23, 10) +0.8%
QNLI 5463 97.5% +0.77% +0.60% (0.14%, 0.78%) +0.55% + 0.69% +1.31 (0.552, 9) +0.9%
MNLI-m 9796 91.6% +1.08% +0.82% ( 0.08%, 1.12%) +0.67% +0.12% + 0.97 (0.442, 10) +0.2%
MNLI-mm 9847 91.3% +1.09% +0.84% ( 0.08%, 1.14%) +0.68% +0.34% + 1.29 (0.550, 8) +0.3%
QQP 390965 91.0% +0.18% + 0.13% (8.45 × 10
−5
%, 0.19%) +0.11% +0.08% 0.36 (0.121, 5) +0.1%
SQuAD 2.0 8862 90.724% +1.18% +0.91% (0.09%, 1.23%) +0.556% +0.528% +2.23% (0.431,14) † +0.146%
Table 9: The minimum detectable effect (MDE) for various datasets given the current top accuracy on the leader-
board on May 6th, 2020. See Appendix E for expanded details. How to use this table? Suppose you are building
a model to get SOTA on any of these datasets. If you don’t have a reasonable expectation that your model will
exceed the MDE, then it is not worth proceeding with the study on a dataset of this size and instead either more
data should be collected or a different (larger) dataset used. MDE (Lachenbruch, 1992) provides a mid-point and
upper/lower bound assumptions using the most conservative and generous estimates of model agreement. MDE
Binomial uses the binomial test as the assumed statistical test and calculates the MDE using the exact mechanism
from Appendix E.5. See also discussion by Arend and Sch¨afer (2019).
̂
 ∆ is the expected effect by fitting a regres-
sion to all SOTA improvement claims found in reviewed papers. |∆| (std.err., n) is the average improvement in
surveyed papers that claimed SOTA and had a positive effect size reported for the dataset (with standard error and
the number of papers in parentheses). † indicates that the SQuAD 2.0 average improvement was based on improve-
ments to the SQuAD leaderboard, but weren’t necessarily reported as improvements in a publication. ∆
SOT A 
is
the gap between the SOTA model (ALBERT + DAAF + NAS) on GLUE and the next best model (ERNIE) – this
was not included in the regression.
Statistic N Mean St. Dev. Min Pctl(25) Pctl(75) Max
Power 57 0.698 0.352 0.034 0.407 1.000 1.000
P 57 0.220 0.283 0.000 0.00000 0.348 1.000
Statistic N Percentage -
% Powered 57 0.456% − − − − −
% Significant 57 0.509% − − − − −
% significant and Powered 57 0.368% − − − − −
Table 10: We examine the claims of SOTA improvement in surveyed GLUE papers and use a leave-one-out
regression-based estimate of effect size and overlap to simulate how many authors would have found their study
to be well-powered. We also examine how many of the observed effects were likely significant based on predicted
model overlap. We note that if we use the observed effect in a post-hoc analysis, the proportion of studies falling
below the MDE is even higher.

Binomial
Lach (Mid)
Lach (Max)
Lach (Min)
Prior
% Powered
0
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 14: Of the claims of improvement over a given
baseline (indicated in text and via bolded values in ta-
bles) across 14 papers on the GLUE leaderboard (also
seen in Table 10). We find only 26.7% of observed ef-
fects met the MDE to the binomial power calculation,
30% met the MDE according to the midpoint calcu-
lation of (Lachenbruch, 1992), 26.7% met the MDE
when using the upper bound from the (Lachenbruch,
1992) calculation, 78.3% met the MDE when using
the most generous (unlikely) assumptions for power ac-
cording to the MDE (Lachenbruch, 1992) calculation,
and 36.7% met the MDE when using the regression-
fitted prior of model overlap. Note: this assumes the
true population effect is the test set effect size. While
this is post-hoc power analysis, we felt it may be useful
to consider in the context that for a given model com-
parison on a given test set there is no variance and thus
post-hoc power analysis is acceptable. However, for
claims that include the entire data distribution this no
longer holds and we refer back to the main text.
each class sum to one.
M1 negative M1 positive
M2 negative p(both neg.) p(only M1 pos.)
M2 positive p(only M2 pos.) p(both pos.)
Table 11: A contingency table representing the distribu-
tion of possible outcomes for two models (M1 and M2)
on the instances of a single class of labels. The cells of
this table should sum to 1.0 for each class
In addition, we need to assume the true distribu-
tion of labels in the data distribution of interest, p(c)
for c in {1, . . . , C}. Given these assumptions, we
could then simulate an arbitrary number of datasets
from this process. For each instance, we would first
sample a true label (c), and then sample the model
predictions from the corresponding contingency
table. For each simulated dataset, we could then
apply the randomization test (using thousands of
randomizations). By repeating this process many
times, we can directly estimate power for the corre-
sponding assumptions and sample size n.
This process is not particularly efficient, but can
still be run relatively quickly on a laptop. The more
difficult part is choosing good values for the nec-
essary probabilities. However, such an approach
can still be used to test for how sensitive power
is to variations in assumptions. It is also possible
to make simplifying assumptions, such as that the
rate of false positives and false negatives will be
the same across classes, or to estimate some pa-
rameters from training data, such as the underlying
distribution of labels. The same technique can eas-
ily be extended to other metrics that depend on the
contingency table, such as Matthew’s correlation.
G Additional Details for the BLEU
Scores Power Analysis
In this section, we provide further details for the
machine translation (MT) data generation proce-
dure as well as an analysis of how power varies
for a range of values of P
0 
and b
0
, the parameters
estimated from the empirical observations.
G.1 Data Generation Procedure
Recall that using the randomization test to deter-
mine whether two MT systems are statistically dif-
ferent gives rise to the null distribution of differ-
ences in BLEU.
14 
If we had access to large amounts
14
The bootstrap is another valid approach to testing for
differences between models (Koehn, 2004; Graham et al.,
2014; Dror et al., 2018), though note the concerns highlighted

of parallel text, we could instead sample many sub-
sets of real sentences and evaluate the difference
between models on those subsets, which allow us
to characterize the mean and variance of the differ-
ence in model performance. Such estimates could
then be used to estimate power directly. Because
we do not have access to such data, however, we in-
stead rely on the randomization approach, in which
we run several thousand trials where the paired out-
put translations for a subset of the test set samples
are swapped. In order to estimate power, we would
like to be able to generate many datasets from a
data generating procedure, which we can parame-
terize by various parameters, such as the difference
between models. Rather than generating raw text,
however, and computing BLEU scores on that, we
instead attempt to generate only the data necessary
for the randomization test. How can we do this?
In our case, the answer to this question lies in
establishing a relationship between individual sam-
ples and the permuted set within each trial of the
randomization test. This relationship is as follows:
the sum of individual changes to the difference in
BLEU, from swapping single samples at a time,
closely approximates the net change to the differ-
ence in BLEU, from swapping those samples all
at once.
15 
Let S be the set of test set samples
swapped during a single trial of the randomization
test and R
B 
(S) be the difference in BLEU between
the paired outputs after swapping the examples in
S. ∆
B 
is the original difference in BLEU and δ
i 
is
the change to the difference in BLEU from swap-
ping test sample i and leaving all other samples
unswapped. Then, we find that,
∑
i∈S
δ
i 
≈ R
B 
(S) − ∆
B
This relationship is illustrated in Figure 15: Fig-
ure 15a shows the difference between two mod-
els evaluated on the 2019 test set, and Figure 15b
shows the difference between a different pair of
models evaluated on the 2018 test set. We found
the same relationship is true for the 2017 and 2016
test sets, as well.
Now that we have established a relationship to
closely approximate the outcome of each random-
ization trial, all that remains is to define a distri-
bution from which the individual changes to the
by Riezler and Maxwell (2005).
15
Note that this does not directly solve the problem of com-
puting BLEU at the sentence level (Chen and Cherry, 2014),
as it still mimicking the process of evaluating BLEU on a
corpus.
difference in BLEU can be sampled. This distri-
bution is a mixture of a Delta distribution at zero
and a Laplace distribution. The Delta distribution
accounts for the proportion of samples (P
0
) such
that swapping any of them individually results in
no change to the difference in BLEU, i.e. the ef-
fect is zero. For the remaining samples, we fit a
Laplace distribution, as shown in Figure 16. This
Laplace is parametrized by two parameters: loca-
tion (μ) and scale (b). By fitting this mixture to the
individual effects computed from evaluating BLEU
differences on many pairs of models, we discover
that the variance parameter scales inversely propor-
tional to the size of the dataset. Thus, we report
an overall b
0 
value for each dataset, such that b
0 
=
b
k 
∗ n
k
, where b
k 
is the Laplace scale parameter
obtained from dataset k containing n
k 
samples.
For generating synthetic data, we need to specify
μ and b, as well as P
0
. However, because we want
the effect of swapping half the non-zero samples
from this distribution to equal the difference in
BLEU between models, we only use the above fits
to estimate b
0
. We thus complete the generative
process by assuming values for ∆
B 
, n, P
0
, b
0
, and
setting μ = −2 · ∆
B 
/(n · (1 − P
0
)) such that the
average effect of a random subset of n/2 instances
is equal to −∆
B 
. Table 3 in the main paper shows
a range of observed values for P
0 
and b
0
.
G.2 Variation in Power Estimates for a
Range of Parameter Values
Now that we have defined the data generation pro-
cedure, and have estimates for the two parameters,
P
0 
and b
0
, that are needed to simulate datasets, we
can estimate power for a range of values for sam-
ple size n and difference in BLEU ∆
B 
, and see
how these estimates vary as P
0 
and b
0 
change. To
provide a concrete example, suppose that we have
two machine translation models that we expect will
differ by ∆
B 
= 1 BLEU point. For a dataset of
n = 2,000 sentences, we assume that the models
will perform equally for P
0 
= 0.2, i.e. 20% of
sentences, and will assume a base scale parameter
of b
0 
= 26. To compute power, we would fol-
low the process in Algorithm 1, with the following
modifications. On each iteration, we would draw
individual changes to the difference in BLEU from
the distribution specified above, with P
0 
= 0.2,
∆
B 
= 1, b
0 
= 26, and n = 2000. For each such
draw, we would apply the randomization test to
compute a null distribution, using the sum of in-

6.0 5.5 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0
BLEU(perm test) - BLEU(original)
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
(
 
BLEU(single swap) -
 
BLEU(original))
(a) Model trained on WMT19 data versus model trained on
WMT18 data, evaluated on the 2019 test set.
5.5 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5
BLEU(perm test) - BLEU(original)
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
(
 
BLEU(single swap) -
 
BLEU(original))
(b) Model trained on WMT18 data versus model trained on
WMT16 data, evaluated on the 2018 test set.
Figure 15: Correlation between individual changes to ∆
B 
and the net effect.
0.125 0.100 0.075 0.050 0.025 0.000 0.025 0.050 0.075
BLEU(single swaps w/o zeros) - BLEU(original)
0
10
20
30
40 
observed data
laplace pdf
(a) Model trained on WMT19 data versus model trained on
WMT18 data, evaluated on the 2019 test set.
0.100 0.075 0.050 0.025 0.000 0.025 0.050 0.075
BLEU(single swaps w/o zeros) - BLEU(original)
0
10
20
30
40
50 
observed data
laplace pdf
(b) Model trained on WMT18 data versus model trained on
WMT16 data, evaluated on the 2018 test set.
Figure 16: Fitting a Laplace distribution to individual non-zero effects.
dividual amounts as the total effect of flipping a
random subset of pairs. Based on the null distri-
bution, we compute if the difference is significant
for this trial. Repeating this many times and ob-
serving the proportion of trials that are found to be
significant gives us the approximate power.
Figure 17 shows power for a range of values for
∆
B 
, n, P
0 
and b
0
. When P
0 
is low, as is true for the
observed data in Table 3, effect sizes and sample
sizes need to be larger in order for an experiment
to be well-powered. But as P
0 
gets higher, a given
effect size can be detected by a smaller sample size.
On the other hand, as b
0 
increases and consequently
the scale parameter b for the Laplace grows, even
large effect sizes cannot be detected by test sets
containing 5,000 samples.
H Details of Human Evaluation Section
H.1 Meta-analysis of human ratings for
EMNLP 2019
To assess the state of statistical power in a typical
NLP study using human evaluation, we sampled
papers from the mean EMNLP 2019 workshop that
contained the phrase “human eval”. This first pass
returned 117 papers, of which 86 had relevant hu-
man evaluations (in which models were compared),
with the remainder either referencing human evalu-
ation, or containing some other type of evaluation,
such as comparing the agreement between auto-
mated metrics and human performance. Because
some papers had more than one such evaluation, we
had 97 experiments for analysis. Of these 51 were
Likert experiments (as discussed in the main text),
38 were some form of direct model comparison,
and 8 were other.
Significance testing was rare and was reported,
in some form, in only 24% of experiments. Bold-
ing or starring the best results in a table was more
common, occurring in 63% of human rating experi-
ments in our set. Whether bold results implies that
the author is claiming a meaningful difference is
not always clear. We did find one single case of au-
thors performing a power analysis to estimate sam-
ple size among the papers we surveyed (Garbacea
et al., 2019). However, because that paper did not
involve a comparison of models to a baseline, it

0 2 4
difference in BLEU ( 
B
)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
power
P
0 
= 0.0
0 2 4
difference in BLEU ( 
B
)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P
0 
= 0.2
0 2 4
difference in BLEU ( 
B
)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P
0 
= 0.5
0 2 4
difference in BLEU ( 
B
)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P
0 
= 0.8
Sample size
n = 5000
n = 2000
n = 1000
n = 500
n = 200
n = 100
0 2 4
difference in BLEU ( 
B
)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
power
b
0 
= 10.0
0 2 4
difference in BLEU ( 
B
)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
b
0 
= 20.0
0 2 4
difference in BLEU ( 
B
)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
b
0 
= 100.0
0 2 4
difference in BLEU ( 
B
)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
b
0 
= 200.0
Sample size
n = 5000
n = 2000
n = 1000
n = 500
n = 200
n = 100
Figure 17: Power Analysis for BLEU scores: Variation in estimates of power for different values of P
0 
(top) and
b
0 
(bottom). For the top row, b
0 
= 25.8, and for the bottom row, P
0 
= 0.13.
was not included in our analysis. In addition, we
note that few details were provided, such that we
were unable to ascertain precisely how the power
analysis was done.
Because we chose to focus on ordinal ratings, we
further annotated those in order to record the mean
ratings and experimental characteristics (number
of annotators, number of items, number of anno-
tators per item), as well as all differences for all
metrics between the model being proposed and the
best performing baseline evaluated in the paper, as
discussed in the main text.
H.2 Human evaluation datasets
For our analyses, we make use of the following
datasets:
• From Hashimoto et al. (2019) we
use the evaluation data for Reddit,
language modeling, and summariza-
tion. The data is available at https:
//worksheets.codalab.org/worksheets/
0x88644b5ee189402eb19d39d721d1005c
• 
From Dathathri et al. (2020) we use the avail-
able ratings. The data is available at https:
//github.com/uber-research/PPLM
• For WMT19 (http://statmt.org/wmt19/
translation-task.html), the data is avail-
able at https://www.computing.dcu.ie/
˜ygraham/newstest2019-humaneval.tar.
gz
• 
For Holtzman et al. (2020), we obtain the hu-
man evaluation data directly from the authors.
H.3 Linear Mixed Effect Models
To assess power in the human ratings framework,
we used linear mixed effect models with random in-
tercepts and slopes for worker and item, as in Barr
et al. (2013). Following best practices, we use the
following structure, where w is a particular worker
and i is a particular item. There are seven param-
eters, corresponding to the parameters needed for
running a power analysis: fixed effects β
0 
(the in-
tercept) and β
1 
(the model effect), and variance
parameters for the worker intercept (σ
0w
), the item
intercept (σ
0i
) and their respective slope variance
parameters (σ
1w 
and σ
1i
). There is also a variance
parameter for the overall error (σ
wi
). We transform
the Likert ratings to be on a [0, 1] scale and treat
them as normally distributed (which we note is an
imperfect assumption). We give fit parameters for
these values, on a few datasets, in Tables 13, 14,
and 15.

Y
wi 
= β
0 
+ W
0w 
+ I
0i
+ (β
1 
+ W
1w 
+ I
1i
)X
i 
+ e
wi
(5)
I
0i 
∼ N (0, σ
0i
) (6)
W
0i 
∼ N (0, σ
0w
) (7)
I
1i 
∼ N (0, σ
1i
) (8)
W
1i 
∼ N (0, σ
1w
) (9)
e
wi 
∼ N (0, σ
wi
) (10)
For simplicity and convergence issues, we do
not include a correlation parameter in the random
effect structure.
To assess power, we use two possible variance
settings derived from the model fits (“high variance”
and “low variance” settings, in the main text) and
show these in Table 16. We systematically vary
the number of annotators (always assuming each
annotator annotates each item, which is not always
true in typical experiments), the number of items,
and the effect size. We note that simulations can
be customized to the planned analysis, including
aspects such as how many items will be annotated
by each annotator.
To compute power, we use each setting of the pa-
rameters to simulate 200 experiments and compute
the proportion that detect a significant positive ef-
fect (t > 1.96). Significant effects in the opposite
direction (t < −1.96) do not count as detections.
Code for these model fits and simulations is in-
cluded with the online materials. However, we
note that these should be used as a starting point,
rather than being blindly copied, as details may
differ in each experimental setting.
H.4 Head to head human evaluations
Another commonly used form of human evalua-
tion is head to head comparison, where raters are
shown a pair of outputs (one from each model),
and asked to choose which they prefer, sometimes
with “neither” as a third option. Head to head
comparisons offer some advantages over ratings-
basd approaches (Yannakakis and Mart
´
ınez, 2015;
van der Lee et al., 2019), but do not scale as well
when comparing many models.
As with ordinal judgements, there are multiple
ways of analyzing such data. If we treat anno-
tator judgements as independent and identically
distributed (such as if we only collect one judge-
ment from each annotator), we could model this
simply in terms of the underlying probabilities that
a random annotator will prefer each model (as in
the opening example in the main paper). In that
case, running a power analysis would be a simple
as assuming values for the underlying probabilities
of each category (win, lose, draw), as usual based
on pilot data or prior assumptions, and simulat-
ing many draws from that prior, checking in each
sample to see if there is a statistically significant
difference between win and lose.
On the other hand, if multiple judgements will be
collected from each annotator and/or for each pair
of outputs, then it makes sense to use a richer model
to account for all sources of variation, as described
above (see §H.3). In particular, the mixed effects
framework can be adopted, potentially by modeling
the outcome as a logistic model (in the case of win
or lose), with ties either excluded or split.

Dataset Number of Workers Number of Items
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (LM) 124 50
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (summarization) 96 99
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (Reddit) 123 99
WMT19 176 1997
Dathathri et al. (2020) 15 1358
Holtzman et al. (2020) 140 1399
Table 12: Number of workers and items in each of our convenience sampled datasets.
Dataset 
ˆ
ˆ
β
0 
ˆ
β
1 
ˆ
β
2 
ˆ
β
3 
ˆ
β
4 
ˆ
β
5 
ˆ
β
6 
ˆσ
wi
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (LM) 0.55 -0.03 0.25
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (summarization) 0.58 0.06 0.26
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (Reddit) 0.55 0.05 0.03 0.01 0.23
WMT19 0.86 0.04 0.12
Dathathri et al. (2020) 0.62 0.04 -0.05 -0.03 0.16
Holtzman et al. (2020) 0.59 0.02 0.04 0.02 0.01 0 -0.04 0.16
Table 13: Fit fixed effect coefficients for each model along with the residual model variance. If only one model
is compared to a baseline, there is a value for intercept and β
1
. If more than one model, there is an additional
parameter for each model. Because we use contrast coding, each coefficient can be interpreted as the difference
from the grand mean.
Dataset ˆσ
0w 
ˆσ
1w 
ˆσ
2w 
ˆσ
3w 
ˆσ
4w 
ˆσ
5w 
ˆσ
6w
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (LM) 0 0.11 0.11
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (summarization) 0 0.13 0.11
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (Reddit) 0.11 0.04 0.08 0.06 0.17
WMT19 0.07 0.04 0.13
Dathathri et al. (2020) 0 0.04 0.05 0.05 0.05
Holtzman et al. (2020) 0.09 0.05 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.02 0.04
Table 14: Fit random effects standard deviations for worker. As in the equations above, ˆσ
0w 
is the worker intercept
and the rest of the parameters are worker slopes for each model.
Dataset ˆσ
0i 
ˆσ
1i 
ˆσ
2i 
ˆσ
3i 
ˆσ
4i 
ˆσ
5i 
ˆσ
6i
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (LM) 0.04 0.14 0.1
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (summarization) 0.07 0 0.18
Hashimoto et al. (2019) (Reddit) 0 0.13 0.11 0.14 0.14
WMT19 0.05 0.03 0.15
Dathathri et al. (2020) 0 0.16 0.19 0.16 0.16
Holtzman et al. (2020) 0 0.13 0.1 0.12 0.11 0.13 0.13
Table 15: Fit random effects standard deviations for item. As in the equations above, ˆσ
0i 
is the item intercept and
the rest of the parameters are item slopes for each model.
Scenario σ
w0 
σ
w1 
σ
i0 
σ
i1 
σ
wi
Low variance 0.01 0.04 0.01 0.13 0.16
High variance 0.01 0.11 0.04 0.14 0.26
Table 16: An example of high variance and low variance settings. The standard deviations correspond to the
variance parameters for worker intercept, worker slope, item intercept, item slope, and sigma, respectively.

I Additional Plots of Model Overlap
82 84 86 88 90
Min. Accuracy
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
Percent Overlap
electra_large_tricks v. albert
electra_large_tricks v. XLNET
electra_large_tricks v. RoBERTa
electra_large_tricks v. electra_small
electra_large_tricks v. electra_large
electra_large_tricks v. BAM
electra_large_tricks v. BERT
electra_large_tricks v. electra_base
electra_large_tricks v. t5
albert v. XLNET
albert v. RoBERTa
albert v. electra_small
albert v. electra_large
albert v. BAM
albert v. BERT
albert v. electra_base
albert v. t5
XLNET v. RoBERTa
XLNET v. electra_small
XLNET v. electra_large
XLNET v. BAM 
XLNET v. BERT
XLNET v. electra_base
XLNET v. t5
RoBERTa v. electra_small
RoBERTa v. electra_large
RoBERTa v. BAM
RoBERTa v. BERT
RoBERTa v. electra_base
RoBERTa v. t5
electra_small v. electra_large
electra_small v. BAM
electra_small v. BERT
electra_small v. electra_base
electra_small v. t5
electra_large v. BAM 
electra_large v. BERT
electra_large v. electra_base
electra_large v. t5
BAM v. BERT
BAM v. electra_base
BAM v. t5
BERT v. electra_base
BERT v. t5
electra_base v. t5
MNLI-m
82 84 86 88 90
Min. Accuracy
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
Percent Overlap
electra_large_tricks v. albert
electra_large_tricks v. XLNET
electra_large_tricks v. RoBERTa
electra_large_tricks v. electra_small
electra_large_tricks v. electra_large
electra_large_tricks v. BAM
electra_large_tricks v. BERT
electra_large_tricks v. electra_base
electra_large_tricks v. t5
albert v. XLNET
albert v. RoBERTa
albert v. electra_small
albert v. electra_large
albert v. BAM 
albert v. BERT
albert v. electra_base
albert v. t5
XLNET v. RoBERTa
XLNET v. electra_small
XLNET v. electra_large
XLNET v. BAM 
XLNET v. BERT
XLNET v. electra_base
XLNET v. t5
RoBERTa v. electra_small
RoBERTa v. electra_large
RoBERTa v. BAM
RoBERTa v. BERT
RoBERTa v. electra_base
RoBERTa v. t5
electra_small v. electra_large
electra_small v. BAM
electra_small v. BERT
electra_small v. electra_base
electra_small v. t5
electra_large v. BAM
electra_large v. BERT
electra_large v. electra_base
electra_large v. t5
BAM v. BERT
BAM v. electra_base
BAM v. t5
BERT v. electra_base
BERT v. t5
electra_base v. t5
MNLI-mm

85 86 87 88 89 90
Min. Accuracy
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
Percent Overlap
electra_large_tricks v. albert
electra_large_tricks v. XLNET
electra_large_tricks v. RoBERTa
electra_large_tricks v. electra_small
electra_large_tricks v. electra_large
electra_large_tricks v. BAM
electra_large_tricks v. BERT
electra_large_tricks v. electra_base
electra_large_tricks v. t5
albert v. XLNET
albert v. RoBERTa
albert v. electra_small
albert v. electra_large
albert v. BAM
albert v. BERT
albert v. electra_base
albert v. t5
XLNET v. RoBERTa
XLNET v. electra_small
XLNET v. electra_large
XLNET v. BAM
XLNET v. BERT
XLNET v. electra_base
XLNET v. t5
RoBERTa v. electra_small
RoBERTa v. electra_large
RoBERTa v. BAM
RoBERTa v. BERT
RoBERTa v. electra_base
RoBERTa v. t5
electra_small v. electra_large
electra_small v. BAM
electra_small v. BERT
electra_small v. electra_base
electra_small v. t5
electra_large v. BAM
electra_large v. BERT
electra_large v. electra_base
electra_large v. t5
BAM v. BERT
BAM v. electra_base
BAM v. t5
BERT v. electra_base
BERT v. t5
electra_base v. t5
MRPC
88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96
Min. Accuracy
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
Percent Overlap
electra_large_tricks v. RoBERTa
electra_large_tricks v. electra_small
electra_large_tricks v. electra_large
electra_large_tricks v. BAM
electra_large_tricks v. BERT
electra_large_tricks v. electra_base
electra_large_tricks v. t5
RoBERTa v. electra_small
RoBERTa v. electra_large
RoBERTa v. BAM
RoBERTa v. BERT
RoBERTa v. electra_base
RoBERTa v. t5
electra_small v. electra_large
electra_small v. BAM
electra_small v. BERT
electra_small v. electra_base
electra_small v. t5
electra_large v. BAM
electra_large v. BERT
electra_large v. electra_base
electra_large v. t5
BAM v. BERT
BAM v. electra_base
BAM v. t5
BERT v. electra_base
BERT v. t5
electra_base v. t5
QNLI

88.0 88.5 89.0 89.5 90.0 90.5
Min. Accuracy
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
Percent Overlap
electra_large_tricks v. albert
electra_large_tricks v. XLNET
electra_large_tricks v. RoBERTa
electra_large_tricks v. electra_small
electra_large_tricks v. electra_large
electra_large_tricks v. BAM
electra_large_tricks v. BERT
electra_large_tricks v. electra_base
electra_large_tricks v. t5
albert v. XLNET
albert v. RoBERTa
albert v. electra_small
albert v. electra_large
albert v. BAM
albert v. BERT
albert v. electra_base
albert v. t5
XLNET v. RoBERTa
XLNET v. electra_small
XLNET v. electra_large
XLNET v. BAM
XLNET v. BERT
XLNET v. electra_base
XLNET v. t5
RoBERTa v. electra_small
RoBERTa v. electra_large
RoBERTa v. BAM
RoBERTa v. BERT
RoBERTa v. electra_base
RoBERTa v. t5
electra_small v. electra_large
electra_small v. BAM
electra_small v. BERT
electra_small v. electra_base
electra_small v. t5
electra_large v. BAM
electra_large v. BERT
electra_large v. electra_base
electra_large v. t5
BAM v. BERT
BAM v. electra_base
BAM v. t5
BERT v. electra_base
BERT v. t5
electra_base v. t5
QQP
65 70 75 80 85 90
Min. Accuracy
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
Percent Overlap
electra_large_tricks v. albert
electra_large_tricks v. XLNET
electra_large_tricks v. RoBERTa
electra_large_tricks v. electra_small
electra_large_tricks v. electra_large
electra_large_tricks v. BAM
electra_large_tricks v. BERT
electra_large_tricks v. electra_base
electra_large_tricks v. t5
albert v. XLNET
albert v. RoBERTa
albert v. electra_small
albert v. electra_large
albert v. BAM
albert v. BERT
albert v. electra_base
albert v. t5
XLNET v. RoBERTa
XLNET v. electra_small
XLNET v. electra_large
XLNET v. BAM
XLNET v. BERT
XLNET v. electra_base
XLNET v. t5
RoBERTa v. electra_small
RoBERTa v. electra_large
RoBERTa v. BAM
RoBERTa v. BERT
RoBERTa v. electra_base
RoBERTa v. t5
electra_small v. electra_large
electra_small v. BAM
electra_small v. BERT
electra_small v. electra_base
electra_small v. t5
electra_large v. BAM
electra_large v. BERT
electra_large v. electra_base
electra_large v. t5
BAM v. BERT
BAM v. electra_base
BAM v. t5
BERT v. electra_base
BERT v. t5
electra_base v. t5
RTE

91 92 93 94 95 96 97
Min. Accuracy
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
Percent Overlap
electra_large_tricks v. albert
electra_large_tricks v. XLNET
electra_large_tricks v. RoBERTa
electra_large_tricks v. electra_small
electra_large_tricks v. electra_large
electra_large_tricks v. BAM
electra_large_tricks v. BERT
electra_large_tricks v. electra_base
electra_large_tricks v. t5
albert v. XLNET
albert v. RoBERTa
albert v. electra_small
albert v. electra_large
albert v. BAM
albert v. BERT
albert v. electra_base
albert v. t5
XLNET v. RoBERTa
XLNET v. electra_small
XLNET v. electra_large
XLNET v. BAM
XLNET v. BERT
XLNET v. electra_base
XLNET v. t5
RoBERTa v. electra_small
RoBERTa v. electra_large
RoBERTa v. BAM
RoBERTa v. BERT
RoBERTa v. electra_base
RoBERTa v. t5
electra_small v. electra_large
electra_small v. BAM
electra_small v. BERT
electra_small v. electra_base
electra_small v. t5
electra_large v. BAM
electra_large v. BERT
electra_large v. electra_base 
electra_large v. t5
BAM v. BERT
BAM v. electra_base
BAM v. t5
BERT v. electra_base
BERT v. t5
electra_base v. t5
SST-2
65 70 75 80 85 90
Min. Accuracy
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Percent Overlap
electra_large_tricks v. albert
electra_large_tricks v. XLNET
electra_large_tricks v. RoBERTa
electra_large_tricks v. electra_smallelectra_large_tricks v. electra_large
electra_large_tricks v. BAM
electra_large_tricks v. BERT
electra_large_tricks v. electra_base
electra_large_tricks v. t5
albert v. XLNET
albert v. RoBERTa
albert v. electra_small
albert v. electra_large
albert v. BAM
albert v. BERT
albert v. electra_base
albert v. t5
XLNET v. RoBERTa
XLNET v. electra_smallXLNET v. electra_large
XLNET v. BAM
XLNET v. BERT
XLNET v. electra_base
XLNET v. t5
RoBERTa v. electra_small
RoBERTa v. electra_large
RoBERTa v. BAM
RoBERTa v. BERT
RoBERTa v. electra_base
RoBERTa v. t5
electra_small v. electra_large
electra_small v. BAMelectra_small v. BERT
electra_small v. electra_base
electra_small v. t5
electra_large v. BAM
electra_large v. BERTelectra_large v. electra_base
electra_large v. t5
BAM v. BERT 
BAM v. electra_base
BAM v. t5
BERT v. electra_base
BERT v. t5
electra_base v. t5
WNLI
