
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2407.03949

Establishing Provenance Before Coding:
Traditional and Next-Gen Software Signing
Taylor R. Schorlemmer, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, USA
Ethan H. Burmane, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, USA
Kelechi G. Kalu, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, USA
Santiago Torres-Arias, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, USA
James C. Davis, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, USA
Abstract—Software engineers integrate third-party components into their
applications. The resulting software supply chain is vulnerable. To reduce the
attack surface, we can verify the origin of components (provenance) before adding
them. Cryptographic signatures enable this. This article describes traditional
signing, its challenges, and the changes introduced by next-generation signing
platforms.
Index Terms: Provenance; Software Signing; Software Re-Use; Component
Selection; Cybersecurity; Software Engineering
N
early all modern software relies on other soft-
ware components [1]. As illustrated in Fig-
ure 1, these components include libraries,
operating systems, build tools, and deployment tools.
As part of the planning process, software engineers
decide which components they will use to build their
software. These dependencies (and the components
on which they depend in turn) create a software supply
chain with implied trust relationships between software
components and their users. When software engineers
decide which components to use in their software, they
are also deciding which components to trust.
Many recent cybersecurity attacks have exploited
these trust relationships by targeting software com-
ponents and supply chains [1]. In response, many
researchers have proposed enhancements software
supply chain security. Okafor et al.’s literature review
summarized those proposals as addressing three dis-
tinct properties: separation to ensure that failures in
one component are isolated, transparency to see the
full supply chain, and validity to show that components
are not changed unexpectedly (integrity) [2]. Taken
together, these latter two properties can describe the
provenance of both an individual software component
and of the resulting supply chain.
This article focuses on one specific technique
for software component provenance: software signing.
Software signing using public-key cryptography is the
de facto method for assuring the origin of an artifact.
Although signing is an old concept, there have been
many works showing that traditional approaches to
software signing is easier said than done. However,
next-generation signing platforms have emerged in
recent years that improve usability.
In this article, we summarize software supply
chains, traditional methods for software signing, and
the transformative aspects of next-generation software
signing platforms. We discuss the current state of
software signing and describe how improvements to
signing infrastructure are leading to better security
practices. Our goal is for the reader to learn that, due
to the changing software signing landscape, their com-
ponent selection process can, and should, integrate
provenance information.
“A few years from now, everybody expects prove-
nance...they don’t install anything if they can’t prove
where it came from...Signing for open source is proba-
bly the single most important thing for software supply
chain security” — Technical leader
1
TRUST BEFORE CODING
Components Influence Product Code
Before writing code, software engineers consider the
components they will use to build their software. One
of the primary decisions is this: Which external compo-
1
This and other quotes are taken from interviews of industry
cybersecurity experts conducted by Kalu et al. in 2025 [6].
arXiv:2407.03949v2 [cs.CR] 30 Jan 2025

FIGURE 1. Depiction of the software factory model to highlight the external dependencies. Each chain symbol represents
part of the software supply chain involved in producing software. Each component comes from some individual or organization.
Provenance techniques enable downstream users to verify the origins of the components on which they depend.
nents should we build on? Figure 1 depicts the kinds of
components on which software depends, aligned with
the Software Factory Model [4]. The first-party code in
a software product may interact with external libraries
— Which ones? It may rely on a framework or an
operating system for interaction with the outside world
— What is the resulting control flow, and which parts
will be handled by the substrate? When being built —
Should it make use of Ant or Gradle or Bazel? When
being deployed — Should it rely on Docker, Podman,
or Singularity as its virtualization scheme?
Each of these decisions affects the resulting first-
party code. The selected libraries and substrates have
an obvious effect: the code will call one API or another.
More subtle influences are exercised downstream.
Build tools may influence which language features
are used, e.g., if the product can make use of GCC
extensions to C or must rely on the C90 standard.
Deployment tools may influence the parameterization
of the system, e.g., the size of buffers and caches (and
which of these knobs to expose).
Since dependency selection is a weighty matter,
engineers evaluate candidate components along many
dimensions. Functional considerations such as cor-
rectness and performance have long dominated this
selection process. However, the rise of cyberattacks
has made cybersecurity, and particularly the security
risks of depending on external components, a top-of-
mind concern.
Provenance in Software Supply Chains
Provenance is a security property that combines valid-
ity (data and actor integrity) and transparency. Prove-
nance simultaneously demonstrates that the code has
not been modified, and gives evidence of the entity in
control of the code at the time of release [2], [10].
In the past, assessing the provenance of a com-
ponent was left to the judgment of the engineering
team. Now, the urgency of cyberattacks has driven
greater top-down control to improve software supply
chain security. Security requirements related to com-
ponent provenance are being introduced through in-
dustry standards and government regulations. Rele-
vant industry standards include The Linux Foundation’s
Supply Chain Levels for Software Artifacts (SLSA) [4],
CNCF’s Software Supply Chain Best Practices, and
Microsoft’s Secure Supply Chain Consumption Frame-
work (S2C2F). The US government has also published
standards such as NIST’s Secure Software Develop-
ment Framework (NIST-SSDF) and NIST 800-204D,
along with regulations for contractors handling govern-
ment contracts (US Executive Order 14028 [5]).
While security techniques typically ensure distinct
properties (e.g., software attestations ensure trans-
parency, software signing ensures validity), combining
security techniques is often preferred in practice to
reinforce one or more of these properties, with prove-
nance being one such combination. An example of
a combination used to establish provenance involves
signed attestations, which integrate validity (ensuring
data and actor integrity) and transparency (identifying
the entity in control at signing). The Software Bill of
2

Materials (SBOM) is another method for establishing
transparency that can be used in place of attestations.
Next, we briefly summarize these methods to establish
provenance for software components.
Software Signing Software signing is a method of
verifying the origin of software artifacts. Provenance
techniques primarily rely on signing (e.g., digital sig-
natures on source code, binaries, or even git com-
mits) to ensure the integrity of both the actor and
the data within components. Downstream users can
verify the signature to ensure that the software artifact
came from an expected source. Like other provenance
techniques, code signing does not make any quality
guarantees about the software’s correctness (it might
still have bugs!), but it does provide a way to verify the
origin of a piece of software.
Software Bills of Materials (SBOMs) SBOMs contain
a list of all the components that make up a piece of
software. This list often includes the version of each
component and the origin of the component. SBOMs
can be used by downstream users to understand the
risks associated with a piece of software. Furthermore,
SBOMs can be used to ensure that a piece of software
is built with the correct components. SBOMs can be
signed to prove that the manifest has not changed.
Attestations Attestations are pieces of metadata that
describe some aspect of a software artifact. For ex-
amples, build attestations describe how a piece of
software was built, and review attestations indicate that
a particular person has reviewed a piece of code, a
component, a process, etc. Typically, these attestations
are signed to ensure their integrity. This enables users
to verify that the metadata has not been tampered with.
In this article, we focus on the first of these tech-
niques that underpin provenance — software signing.
Like all security practices, signing is not a silver bullet.
Although signing does not guarantee the correctness
of a piece of software, it does provide a way to
verify the origin of a piece of software and that it
has not changed. Most industry standards highlighted
earlier emphasize the importance of signing, which
is prominently featured in their recommendations. For
example, NIST 800-204D requires that attestations
about software products (e.g., their bills of material-
s/SBOMs, build processes, etc.) be cryptographically
signed with a secure key. NIST standards further re-
quire that consumers of software components verify
these attestations before using them. We review some
of the shortcomings of traditional signing methods and
how newer techniques are attempting to resolve these
issues. We first describe the foundations of software
signing: Public-key cryptography.
PRIMER ON PUBLIC-KEY
CRYPTOGRAPHY
Public-key cryptography, also known as asymmetric
cryptography, refers to the subset of cryptographic
methods that utilize a pair of public and private keys.
The advantages of these methods, such as scalability
for a large number of users and the elimination of
the need for a secure channel, enable various appli-
cations (e.g., signing) where symmetric cryptography
falls short. This section gives a brief primer — see the
References section for a starting point on this topic.
Key Terms and Concepts
In a public-key cryptographic system, an application
or user can generate a pair of public and private
keys. The private key is kept secret and the public
key is shared. Data encrypted using one key can be
decrypted using the other. This leads to two basic use
cases: (1) holders of the public key encrypt messages
that can only be read by holders of the private key; or
(2) holders of the private key sign messages (typically
by appending an encrypted hash of the message) that
can be verified by holders of the public key. In either
case, it is important to establish trust in the public key
(i.e., that the public key is from the correct source and
has not been modified). Methods such as public-key
infrastructure and the web of trust have been used to
strengthen this trust.
With respect to provenance, the second use case
is especially important. After establishing trust in the
public key, signatures provide strong guarantees about
the origin of a message. This scheme is used by
several computing applications, detailed next.
Applications in Computing
Public-key cryptography is widely used in comput-
ing. For example, S/MIME (email communication), SS-
L/TLS (network communication), SSH (remote network
access), and even smart cards use forms of public-key
cryptology for secure communication and/or authenti-
cation. Given the topic of this article, our primary inter-
est is on the application of public-key cryptography to
ensuring provenance in the software supply chain. For
this reason, we will focus on software-related signing
tools (which also use public-key cryptography) such as
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) and Sigstore. Let’s take a
look!
3

TRADITIONAL SOFTWARE SIGNING
Many platforms, such as software registries, support
“traditional” signing as a way for engineers to ver-
ify the origin of the software components they rely
on. Traditional signing is relatively simple, but it has
drawbacks. When used correctly, traditional signing
methods can cryptographically ensure the origin of an
artifact. Unfortunately, these methods suffer from poor
adoption and key management issues that can limit
practical use.
How Traditional Signing Works
Several implementations of traditional signing exist, but
they share a common form. The left half of Figure 2
demonstrates how traditional signing is typically used
to provide provenance for software [10]. First, an au-
thor creates a package (A) and a public/private key
pair (B). Next, the author uses the private key to sign
the package (C). Then, the signed package (C) and
the associated public key (D) are published. To use
a package, an engineer downloads the package (E)
and the author’s public key (F) before verifying the
signature (G). If an engineer trusts that the public
key came from the author and the signature verifies
successfully, they can be confident about the origin of
the package.
An Example: Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)
There are several established software signing tools,
such as PGP, Git commit signing, and Docker Content
Trust. These tools vary in the way that they implement
the signing. Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), is a popular
and well established format standardized by OpenPGP.
It was originally created to secure email traffic, but has
since been used to encrypt and sign a variety of other
data types. The OpenPGP standard is implemented in
a few different ways, but a notable instance is GNU
Privacy Guard (GPG).
Using GPG, artifact authors can create a key
with gpg --gen-key. This walks them through cre-
ating a public/private key pair. After generating a
key pair, they can then sign some file with a com-
mand like gpg -ab some.file. This creates a de-
tached signature file called some.file.asc. The au-
thor can then publish their file, signature, and pub-
lic key. After fetching the file, signature, and public
key, an engineer downstream can verify the file using
gpg --verify some.file.asc some.file.
Challenges
“A lot of the ways in which I think previous teams’
software signing hasn’t been useful is...key manage-
ment...how the private key is managed but also in how
the public key is made available” — Member of senior
management
The example commands of GPG above seem sim-
ple. In just two commands, a software producer can
create keys and a signature, and a consumer can
validate the signature in a single command. However,
there are several potential problems with this process.
Traditional signing methods have often been criti-
cized for their lack of usability. Academic literature, in-
cluding works similar to the “Johnny signs” studies [7],
has documented these criticisms. In practice, there is a
noticeable trend where several traditional signing tools
are being discontinued by various software registries,
such as PyPI’s cessation of PGP use [3]. Common
usability issues are generally associated with key man-
agement, inadequate documentation, and user inter-
face design challenges.
Key Management Key management is particularly
manual in traditional signing. Users are responsible
for securely storing their private key and sharing their
public key. This means that they must not lose the
private key and must keep it private. This becomes
more complicated in organizational environments with
personnel turnover. When keys become compromised,
or are otherwise no longer secure, all corresponding
signatures loose trust. This also necessitates the gen-
eration and distribution of new keys.
Identity Verification Establishing trust in a public key
is also particularly challenging. Once a user creates
a key pair, they must find a way to share their public
key. This is typically done through infrastructure like
public key servers or through other file sharing means.
Unfortunately, many of these methods do not provide
strong identity guarantees for the creator of the public
key. The web of trust was introduced as a way to
introduce a more confident binding between an identity
and a public key. There are, however, even issues with
this technique (i.e., relying on social interactions like
signing parties).
Transparency Additionally, there are transparency is-
sues with traditional signing schemes. Users typically
do not have knowledge about which artifacts were
signed or what information should be present. Without
knowledge about what modifications have been made
to a project’s metadata, users cannot verify that supply
chain actors are behaving properly. For example, a
downstream user may not be able to detect that the
4

FIGURE 2. Traditional workflow for software signing (left) and next-gerneration workflow for software signing (right). Figure
reproduced and adapted from Kalu et al. [6].
FIGURE 3. Software signing trends in four public software
package registries. Figure is from Schorlemmer et al. [3].
signature identity has changed in a project.
Current State
The current state of signing varies depending on the
type and environment of the software being developed.
In general, signing is more prevalent in commercial
software than in open source software. This indicates
that provenance is lacking in some open source envi-
ronments.
Open Source In open source, the state of signing
is generally poor. This is depicted in Figure 3. The
number of user created signatures on high profile
platforms like Docker Hub, PyPI, and Hugging Face
has historically been low. There are many potential
reasons for this, but a simple explanation is that plat-
forms do not require signatures [3]. This is particularly
evident when comparing Maven Central (a platform
that requires signing) to the rest in Figure 3.
Regardless of the reason, the small amount of
signing on these platforms decreases the effectiveness
of signing. Since so few people sign their projects,
verifying signatures on a project that relies on several
dependencies is very hard to do. Furthermore, this
lack of verification dissuades maintainers from going
through the hassle of creating and managing signa-
tures. PyPI is a prime example of this, after years of
poor adoption, the registry maintainers decided to stop
supporting PGP. In these circumstances, establishing
provenance is hard.
The case is a bit different in ecosystems that
require signing. In instances like the Debian project
or on platforms like Maven Central, contributors must
sign and maintain keys. This means that other users
of those ecosystems can verify provenance. Unfortu-
nately, it also means that users of these platforms
have to deal with the drawbacks of traditional signing
schemes.
Commercial Software In commercial software, the im-
plementation and utilization of signing are significantly
more pronounced. Recent surveys [9], [8] indicate
that organizations value signing (and, therefore, prove-
nance). However, the cost of setting up a signing
infrastructure is a general concern. Although there is
a diversity in the choice of tools, the perceived impor-
tance, and the challenges encountered, the adoption
of signing as a practice remains widely recognized and
actively employed.
5

NEXT-GEN. SOFTWARE SIGNING
“Sigstore comes in...keyless signing...you don’t have
to worry about long-lasting static SSH keys, or keys
being compromised, or rotating keys...you don’t have
big servers to store all these signatures” — Manager
“[Sigstore’s] other strength...I can associate my
identity with an OIDC identity as opposed to neces-
sarily needing to generate a key and keep track of that
key and yada, yada. So that’s super useful because I
could say, ‘Oh, this is signed with [a] GitHub identity.’
So unless my GitHub identity has been compromised,
that’s much better.” ” — Member of senior management
In the past several years, many structural improve-
ments have been made to signing schemes. We call
the result next-generation signing tools.
Changes to Signing
Next-generation signing tools are motivated by the
challenges associated with traditional signing meth-
ods, such as key management, identity verification,
and transparency. These tools still use some of the
primitive constructs (e.g., cryptographic algorithms) of
traditional signing. However, they change the signing
workflow depicted in Figure 2 to address shortcomings
in traditional signing tools.
Key Management One way to address key manage-
ment issues is to use ephemeral keys. Ephemeral keys
are temporary keys generated for a single signing ses-
sion and discarded afterward. They are created using
secure key generation algorithms, with the private key
securely generated, used for signing, and discarded
after a single use within a validity window. The cor-
responding public key is then bound to the signer’s
verified identity, ensuring authorship, and made avail-
able for signature verification. These keys do not need
to be stored and managed by a user. This reduces
the burden on users to ensure that they follow best
practices for keys over their lifetime.
Identity Verification Linking a public key to an identity
is a difficult problem. Unlike traditional signing methods
that rely on public key infrastructure, the web of trust
model, or even off hand verification (e.g., by meeting
with the keyholder in person during a conference),
next-generation signing tools leverage Single Sign-
On (SSO) protocols like OpenID Connect (OIDC),
SAML, and OAuth. Next-generation signatures bind
ephemeral public keys to an account managed by an
identity provider. For example, using the OAuth 2.0
protocol, a signing system might verify that a user has
access to an account through an identity provider (e.g.,
Google). After verifying that a user has access to an
account, the signing system would bind an ephemeral
public key (i.e., , issue a certificate) to that account.
This process links each signature to a verified identity,
ensuring that it can be confidently traced back to the
signer, thereby strengthening both security and trust.
Shift Towards Key and Software Transparency Trans-
parency allows verifiers to ensure that key-issuers do
not misbehave (e.g., by handing out a key to another
party). Beyond allowing for easy key management
for users, next-generation signing systems integrate
transparency for keys issued and signatures created.
This transparency most often takes the form of a
public append-only logs for signatures and identity-
key bindings. This allows users to actively monitor
signatures and ensure that they are not being withheld
or re-used.
How Next-Gen. Signing Works
Compiling these changes to signing, we can see the
general form of next-generation signing tools. The right
half of Figure 2 shows an example protocol for next-
generation software signing.
Components There are several components in a
next-generation signing system. Generally, the follow-
ing services are used:
• An identity provider verifies that users have ac-
cess to an account.
• A certificate authority (CA) acts as a trust-root
and binds public keys to accounts verified by
identity providers. It issues a certificate to verify
the binding.
• A certificate log keeps a public, append-only
copy of certificates issued by the CA to differ-
ent accounts. This allows an account holder to
verify that only authorized certificates have been
issued.
• A signature log keeps a public, append-only
copy of signatures and their associated cer-
tificates. This allows verifiers to ensure that
signatures were created during the lifespan of
ephemeral keys and that the public key is valid.
Each of these services runs independently. As a result,
users can check for the compromise of one component
by auditing the others. For example, if an attacker
attempted to modify an entry in the signature log, users
could detect that either the certificate had changed
6

(i.e., , by referencing the certificate log) or that the
signature had changed (i.e., , by checking the signature
with the public key embedded in the certificate).
Workflow First, an author creates a package (A) and
chooses one of the next-gen signing tools. The tool
then follows a supported authentication protocol to
redirect the signer to an identity provider of their
choice (B). After successful authentication, the identity
provider issues an identity token to the signing tool (C).
This token serves as non-repudiable proof that the user
authenticated successfully. The tool then generates an
ephemeral key pair (D).
The signer’s identity, along with the public key,
is bound together through a short validity certificate
issued by a Certificate Authority (CA), or alternatively,
it may be bound directly within the issued token (E).
While the specific method of binding may vary, the
main goal is to link the public key to an identity. If a
certificate is used, it is published to a public log (F).
Once the identity binding is complete, the private key is
used to sign the package during the short lifetime of the
certificate (G), creating a signature whose authorship
is verifiable.
To verify the software, a user retrieves the signed
software, along with the certificate and the expected
signer’s identity. First, the certificate is verified against
the root CA and key chain (H). Next, the certificate
is checked against the certificate transparency log (I).
The bound identity in the certificate is then compared
with the expected identity. If all checks pass, the public
key is retrieved from the certificate and used to verify
the signature on the package. If all validations are
successful, the user has confidence in the origin of
the package.
Examples of Next-Gen. Signing Platforms
Various systems have been engineered to address the
challenges of traditional signing in the last couple of
years. Perhaps one of the most visible ones is the Sig-
store project, which simplifies signature creation and
verification. Sigstore is an open source and free-to-use
project that is supported by the Linux Foundation and
several other organizations. In order to achieve this,
Sigstore leverages existing standards such as OIDC
for identity verification, as well as Transparency Logs
for software and key transparency.
Similarly to Sigstore, the Open PubKey
(OPK) project provides a similar construction
(identity providers to issue single-use ephemeral
keys). However, it tries to minimize infrastructure
requirements. Even though OPK is designed to be
applicable to other use cases (e.g., , ssh authentication
using identity providers and end-to-end encrypted
chat), it is also applicable for next-generation software
signing. Currently, OPK is used by DockerHub to
sign their official images [14]. A generalization of this
construction is also being developed by standards
organizations. Of particular interest, the IETF’s Proof
of Issuer Key Authority (PIKA) can be applied to the
same usecases as Sigstore and OPK [13].
Challenges
Although next-generation signing tools address many
shortcomings of traditional signing methods, some
challenges remain. Even when using next-generation
signing tools, users must still decide who to trust, watch
for anomalous behaviors, and decide what to do when
signature checks fail.
Identity Verification Next-generation signing tech-
niques rely on identity providers (e.g., Google and
GitHub) to bind accounts with ephemeral public keys,
but users must still decide which identities to trust.
Signatures only indicate where the software came
from, not if the producer is trustworthy. If users decide
to trust a bad actor, they might receive signed, but
malicious, software artifacts.
Transparency Next-generation signing still requires
active analysis on the behalf of its users. Tools like
transparency logs make this job easier, but users still
need to watch for malicious behavior. For example, if
identity providers are compromised (e.g., leaked/stolen
credentials), then malicious signatures can be created.
This requires the signer to actively monitor certificate
and signature logs for unauthorized behavior and con-
tinuously check for account breaches.
Signature Checks Some software artifacts may still
not have signatures even if next-generation signing is
available. This is already a problem in current package
registries where signing is not required [3]. Unfor-
tunately, this leaves the question: What to do with
unsigned dependencies? Furthermore: What to do with
bad signatures? Without widespread adoption in an
ecosystem, the value of signing is greatly depreciated;
and without a security policy for signatures, any benefit
they provide may go unnoticed.
Current State
Next-generation software signing solutions have ex-
perienced a significant rise in popularity since their
introduction. Industry (e.g., companies like Shopify,
7

Autodesk and Verizon) and Open Source (e.g., the
Python interpreter and Kubernetes) organizations alike
have integrated these schemes to establish prove-
nance [11], [12]. These successes have led to public
recognition from government strategies such as the
US government CISA’s “Improving Security of Open
Source Software in Operational Technology and In-
dustrial Control Systems” as well as industry organi-
zations such as JPMorgan’s CISO. However, concrete
measurements of adoption of these technologies are
lacking, and thus it is difficult to fully assess whether
this publicity is affecting adoption.
As a step toward quantifying the adoption status
of next-generation signing tools, we looked at trends
related to one of these tools, Sigstore. Our goal was
to estimate its usage. We examined two aspects of
usage: download rates of the Sigstore toolkit, and an-
alyzing use and discussion of the tools and associated
techniques, such as npm’s provenance feature,
2 
which
use Sigstore under the hood.
To estimate the adoption rate of next-generation
signing tools, we obtained the download statistics
for various Sigstore-related tooling over the past 24
months. Two Sigstore tools were checked: NPM and
PyPI. The PyPI download data was collected using the
PyPI database as queried through Google’s BigQuery.
The NPM download data was collected using npm-
stat. Figure 4 summarizes our result. Both PyPI and
npm versions of the tooling are seeing increasing
use, measured in the tens of thousands to millions of
downloads over time.
To observe the usage and discussion of next-
generation signing tools, we used Sourcegraph’s Code
Search to query GitHub repositories for keywords re-
lating to the tools. These keywords were determined
based on package names (top half of the table) and
indicators of provenance workflows within repositories
(bottom half of the table). The results of these keyword
searches are shown in Table 1.
Both measures (Figure 4, Table 1) indicate increas-
ing interest in Sigstore, the next-generation signing tool
that we examined.
CONCLUSIONS
Software supply chains are not new, but they are more
visible than ever before. Software signing — of code,
of attestations, of bills of materials, and of all other as-
pects of consuming a software component — is a key
2
See https://docs.npmjs.com/generating-provenance-
statements.
FIGURE 4. The Sigstore project has tooling available in
several programming languages. This chart shows the down-
loads over time of the associated package for the Python-
PyPI package (blue, in thousands) and the JavaScript-NPM
package (orange, in millions).
TABLE 1. Estimates of use of next-gen signing tools via key-
word searches of open-source repository files. The Method
was as follows: For the tools in the top half of the table,
we searched for the tool name as a string, anywhere in
the project. For the tools in the lower half of the table, we
check flags or fields in GitHub workflow files that indicate the
use of Sigstore. In npm provenance workflows, we check if
the “id-token” field is set to write. For npm publishing with
provenance, we checked for the “–provenance” flag.
Approach Measure Mentions Repos
sigstore Name 143,830 5,229
sigstore-python Name 1,041 396
sigstore-java Name 194 21
sigstore-rs Name 235 23
in-toto Name 68,752 985
npm provenance
workflow
GitHub
Work-
flow
37,363 26,255
npm repos pub-
lishing with prove-
nance
GitHub
Work-
flow
1,427 896
8

technique in ensuring that supply chain artifacts have
not been modified since they were authored by trusted
parties. Although the previous generation of signing
tools left much to be desired, the next generation of
tools has addressed many of those challenges and is
seeing widespread adoption.
The technological capability is now present for any
component provider to easily sign their products. Soft-
ware signature creation and verification are already
commonplace. While selecting components, software
engineers can and should now rely only on compo-
nents bearing the signature of the author. Conversely,
software producers should expect that their consumers
will begin to demand these signatures, as a result
of due diligence or the need to meet current or an-
ticipated regulations regarding software provenance.
Soon, checking signatures before coding will be a
normal part of component selection.
Finally, we caution the reader that provenance
— even cryptographically-assured provenance using
signatures — does not guarantee correctness nor
security. Provenance information reduces the risk of
certain classes of attacks, such as man-in-the-middle
substitutions. Provenance information also improves
the engineer’s ability to estimate the quality of the
components they rely on, e.g., based on the reputation
of the supplier. But guaranteeing the correctness and
security of a component (not to mention the resulting
system) is a task for formal methods, which is another
endeavor for computing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Zach Steindler of GitHub for his
feedback on our estimates of npm provenance adop-
tion, and Chinenye Okafor for her input on the design
of next-gen signing systems. This work was supported
by the US National Science Foundation under award
#2229703, and by funds from Google and Cisco.
REFERENCES
1. Sonatype. (2024). 9th annual State of the
Software Supply Chain. Sonatype. Retrieved from
https://www.sonatype.com/hubfs/2023%20Sonatype-
%209th%20Annual%20State%20of%20the%
20Software%20Supply%20Chain-%20Update.pdf.
2. C. Okafor, T. R. Schorlemmer, S. Torres-Arias, and J.
C. Davis. (2022). “SoK: Analysis of Software Supply
Chain Security by Establishing Secure Design Prop-
erties.” In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Workshop
on Software Supply Chain Offensive Research and
Ecosystem Defenses (SCORED).
3. T. R. Schorlemmer, K. G. Kalu, L. Chigges, K. M. Ko,
E. A. Ishgair, S. Bagchi, S. Torres-Arias, and J. C.
Davis. (2024). “Signing in four public software package
registries: Quantity, quality, and influencing factors.” In
Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (S&P).
4. The Linux Foundation. (2024). “What is SLSA?
(Supply-chain Levels for Software Artifacts)”. Re-
trieved June 17, 2024, from https://slsa.dev.
5. Biden, J. R., Jr. (2021, May 12). “Exec-
utive Order 14028: Improving the nation’s
cybersecurity”. The White House. Retrieved
from https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
presidential-actions/2021/05/12/executive-order-on-
improving-the-nations-cybersecurity/.
6. K.G. Kalu, T. Singla, C. Okafor, S. Torres-Arias,
and J.C. Davis. (2025). “An Industry Interview Study
of Software Signing for Supply Chain Security”. In
USENIX Security Symposium.
7. A. Whitten and J.D. Tygar. (1999). “Why Johnny
Can’t Encrypt: A Usability Evaluation of PGP 5.0.” In
USENIX Security Symposium.
8. P. Ladisa, H. Plate, M. Martinez, and O. Barais. (2023).
“SoK: Taxonomy of Attacks on Open-Source Software
Supply Chains,” in Proceedings of 2023 IEEE Sympo-
sium on Security and Privacy (S&P).
9. D. A. Wheeler, J. S. Meyers, M. Barbero, and R.
Rumbul. (2023). “New SLSA++ Survey Reveals Real-
World Developer Approaches to Software Supply
Chain Security.” https://openssf.org/blog/2023/03/
15/new-slsa-survey-reveals-real-world-developer-
approaches-to-software-supply-chain-security/
10. D. Cooper, A. Regenscheid, M. Souppaya, C. Bean,
M. Boyle, D. Cooley, and M. Jenkins. (2018). “Security
considerations for code signing”. NIST Cybersecurity
White Paper 5.
11. Z. Newman, J.S. Meyers, and S. Torres-Arias. (2022).
“Sigstore: Software signing for everybody.” In Pro-
ceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (CCS).
12. K. Merrill, Z. Newman, S. Torres-Arias, and K.R.
Sollins. (2023). “Speranza: Usable, privacy-friendly
software signing.” In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communica-
tions Security (CCS).
13. R.L. Barnes and S. Goldberg. (2024). “Proof
of Issuer Key Authority (PIKA)”. IETF standard–
Draft. Retrieved from https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/
draft-barnes-oauth-pika-00.html
14. J. Stoten. (2023). “Signing Docker official
images using OpenPubkey”. Retrieved from
https://www.docker.com/blog/signing-docker-official-
images-using-openpubkey/. Retrieved June 2024.
9

15. BastionZero. (2023). “OpenPubkey”. Retrieved from
https://www.bastionzero.com/openpubkey. Retrieved
June 2024.
Taylor R. Schorlemmer is a Lieutenant in the US
Army. His research interests include software engineer-
ing and cybersecurity, with an emphasis on software
signing and software supply chains. Schorlemmer re-
ceived his MSc in Computer Engineering from Purdue
University. He is a Member of the IEEE. Contact him at
tschorle@purdue.edu.
Ethan H. Burmane is an undergraduate student in
the Elmore Family School of Electrical & Computer
Engineering at Purdue University, at West Lafayette, IN,
47907, USA. His research interests include software
engineering and cybersecurity. Contact him at ebur-
mane@purdue.edu.
Kelechi G. Kalu is a PhD student in the Elmore
Family School of Electrical & Computer Engineering
at Purdue University, at West Lafayette, IN, 47907,
USA. His research interests include software engi-
neering and cybersecurity, with a focus on software
supply chains. Kalu received his BSc in Electronic and
Computer Engineering from Nnamdi Azikiwe University,
Nigeria. Kalu is a Member of the IEEE. Contact him at
kalu@purdue.edu.
Santiago Torres-Arias is an assistant professor in
the Elmore Family School of Electrical & Computer
Engineering at Purdue University, at West Lafayette,
IN, 47907, USA. His research interests include cy-
bersecurity, cryptography, and computer systems, with
an emphasis in software supply chain security. Torres-
Arias received his PhD in Computer Science from New
York University (NYU). He is a Member of the ACM
and a Member of the IEEE. Contact him at santiago-
torres@purdue.edu.
James C. Davis is an assistant professor in the El-
more Family School of Electrical & Computer Engineer-
ing at Purdue University, at West Lafayette, IN, 47907,
USA. His research interests include human and techni-
cal aspects of software engineering and cybersecurity,
with an emphasis on the analysis of failures. Davis
received his PhD in Computer Science from Virginia
Tech. He is a Member of the ACM and a Senior Member
of the IEEE. Contact him at davisjam@purdue.edu.
10
