
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2502.00561

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a
Social Science Measurement Challenge
Hanna Wallach 
1 
Meera Desai 
2 
A. Feder Cooper 
1 
Angelina Wang 
3 
Chad Atalla 
1 
Solon Barocas 
1
Su Lin Blodgett 
1 
Alexandra Chouldechova 
1 
Emily Corvi 
1 
P. Alex Dow 
1 
Jean Garcia-Gathright 
1
Alexandra Olteanu 
1 
Nicholas Pangakis 
1 
Stefanie Reed 
1 
Emily Sheng 
1 
Dan Vann 
1
Jennifer Wortman Vaughan 
1 
Matthew Vogel 
1 
Hannah Washington 
1 
Abigail Z. Jacobs 
2
Abstract
The measurement tasks involved in evaluating
generative AI (GenAI) systems lack sufficient sci-
entific rigor, leading to what has been described as
“a tangle of sloppy tests [and] apples-to-oranges
comparisons” (Roose, 2024). In this position
paper, we argue that the ML community would
benefit from learning from and drawing on the
social sciences when developing and using mea-
surement instruments for evaluating GenAI sys-
tems. Specifically, our position is that evaluating
GenAI systems is a social science measurement
challenge. We present a four-level framework,
grounded in measurement theory from the social
sciences, for measuring concepts related to the
capabilities, behaviors, and impacts of GenAI
systems. This framework has two important
implications: First, it can broaden the expertise in-
volved in evaluating GenAI systems by enabling
stakeholders with different perspectives to partici-
pate in conceptual debates. Second, it brings rigor
to both conceptual and operational debates by
offering a set of lenses for interrogating validity.
1. Evaluating GenAI Systems
Evaluating a generative AI (GenAI) system
1
—i.e., making
and justifying evaluative claims about that system—is
critical for making decisions about whether it should
be used for a particular purpose, whether it should be
1
Microsoft Research 
2
University of Michigan
3
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Hanna Wallach
<wallach@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 
nd 
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
We use the term “GenAI system” to refer to either 1) a single
GenAI model or 2) one or more integrated software components,
where at least one component is an GenAI model. When we wish
to refer to a single GenAI model, we use the term “GenAI model.”
deployed in a particular context, or even whether it should
be redesigned. The process of evaluation
2 
necessarily
requires information about the system’s capabilities (like its
mathematical reasoning skills), behaviors (like regurgitating
pieces of its training data), and impacts (like causing its
users to feel harmed). Often, this information takes the form
of measurements on nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio
scales (Hand, 2004), where each measurement reflects the
amount of some concept of interest exhibited by that system
(related to its capabilities, behaviors, or impacts) in some
context of interest. Such measurements are obtained via
the process of measurement, which uses measurement in-
struments
3 
(e.g., datasets, classifiers, annotation guidelines,
scoring rubrics, and aggregation functions) that instantiate a
particular measurement approach (e.g., benchmarking, auto-
mated red teaming, real-world evaluations, and user studies).
Across academia, industry, and government (e.g., National
Institute for Standards and Technology, 2024; Cooper et al.,
2023; Perez et al., 2022; Weidinger et al., 2023), there is an
increasing awareness that the measurement tasks involved
in evaluating GenAI systems are more difficult than those
involved in evaluating traditional ML systems. This is be-
cause GenAI systems accept a variety of inputs, produce
diverse outputs, support a wide range of use cases, and have
potential impacts on people and society that range from
mundane to catastrophic. As a result, concepts related to the
capabilities, behaviors, and impacts of GenAI systems—the
concepts to be measured when evaluating GenAI systems—
are often abstract and deeply intertwined with people and
society. Abstract concepts cannot be directly measured and
must therefore be indirectly measured from other observable
phenomena. In addition, their meanings and understand-
ings are often contested (e.g., Mulligan et al., 2016; 2019)
across—and within—use cases, cultures, and languages.
Although ML researchers and practitioners have proposed
myriad measurement instruments for evaluating GenAI
2
We provide definitions for italicized terms in Appendix A.
3
We note that measurement instruments can be qualita-
tive or quantitative, but must collectively result in measurements.
1
arXiv:2502.00561v2 [cs.CY] 6 Jun 2025

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
systems, the abstract, contested nature of the concepts to
be measured, coupled with the ways that measurement
instruments are typically developed and used in the ML
community, mean it is difficult to know precisely what
these instruments are measuring and why, let alone whether
they and their resulting measurements are accurate or
useful—i.e., valid. In this position paper, we argue that
the ML community needs to pay greater attention to the
process of measurement. We take the position that eval-
uating GenAI systems is a social science measurement
challenge. Specifically, the measurement tasks involved in
evaluating GenAI systems—regardless of the measurement
approaches and instruments used—are highly reminiscent
of the measurement tasks found throughout the social
sciences. Social scientists have been rigorously measuring
abstract, contested concepts—ideology, democracy, media
bias, framing, to name just a few—for over fifty years (e.g.,
Berelson, 1952; Zaller, 1992). As a result, we argue that
the ML community would benefit from learning from and
drawing on the social sciences when developing and using
measurement instruments for evaluating GenAI systems.
We emphasize that we are not suggesting that the ML
community adopt existing measurement instruments from
the social sciences by transferring measurement instruments
designed for humans (e.g., specific psychometric tests) to
GenAI systems. Rather, we suggest standardizing the pro-
cess of measurement by adopting a variant of the framework
that social scientists use for measurement, shown in Fig-
ure 1. We also emphasize that although we focus on GenAI
systems, this framework applies equally well to traditional
ML systems. However, given the “general purpose” nature
of GenAI systems, the consequences of poor evaluations
are wider ranging and, in some cases, more severe. Finally,
we note that we are not saying that the ways measurement
instruments are typically developed and used in the ML com-
munity should be abandoned. Rather, our position is that
improving the quality of GenAI evaluations means changing
how the ML community conducts such evaluations—a
call to action. Situating the traditional ML approach to
measurement within the framework we propose can reveal
gaps and limitations, helping mature current measure-
ment practices into a rigorous science of GenAI evaluations.
Paper roadmap: In the next section, we discuss related
work, explaining how our position systematically unifies
and reinterprets work spanning multiple ML subcommu-
nities. In Section 3, we present a four-level framework,
grounded in measurement theory from the social sciences,
for measuring concepts related to the capabilities, behaviors,
and impacts of GenAI systems. We then describe how
to use this framework in Section 4, illustrating both the
core ideas and our arguments using a hypothetical running
example. We also show how the framework brings clarity to
existing debates about measurement in the ML community.
In Section 5, we summarize key actions for adopting the
framework and discuss potential barriers to doing so. In
Section 6, we present and address some views that provide
alternatives to our position, before concluding in Section 7.
2. Related Work
Critiques of measurement instruments: There is a
growing body of work demonstrating that the measurement
instruments used in current evaluations of GenAI systems
have serious limitations (e.g., Raji et al., 2021; Hutchinson
et al., 2022; Rauh et al., 2024; Roose, 2024; Eriksson et al.,
2025; Brandom, 2025), including conceptual confusion
around precisely what is being measured, insufficient
interrogation of validity, and conflicting measurements.
Although much of this work has focused on benchmarking,
these critiques extend to other measurement approaches,
such as automated red teaming and real-world evaluations.
Parallels to psychometric tests: In response to these
critiques, recent work has advocated for learning from
and drawing on psychometrics when designing and using
capability and behavior benchmarks for GenAI models (e.g.,
Wang et al., 2023b; Alaa et al., 2025; Salaudeen et al.,
2025). These papers highlight structural similarities
between benchmarks and psychological tests (e.g., items,
scoring rubrics, and aggregation functions) and emphasize
the importance of interrogating validity, often drawing
on the foundational work of Cronbach & Meehl (1955).
Although our position is similar to this recent work, it is
broader in scope. Our position extends to all concepts of
interest, all GenAI systems in all contexts of interest, and
all measurement approaches and instruments. Because this
space is both expansive and diverse, the structural similar-
ities between benchmarks and psychological tests do not
universally hold across it. We therefore argue for drawing
more broadly on the social sciences, where researchers
routinely measure all kinds of concepts, exhibited by diverse
objects in a wide range of contexts, using a variety of mea-
surement approaches and instruments. By taking a broader
position, the framework we propose brings clarity to all
measurement tasks involved in evaluating GenAI systems.
Responsible AI: Responsible AI (RAI) researchers and
practitioners have long made similar arguments to ours, par-
ticularly in discussions related to the fairness of ML systems.
Many have noted that measurements of abstract, contested
concepts are hard to interpret and often reflect different
meanings and understandings (e.g., Blodgett et al., 2020;
Goldfarb-Tarrant et al., 2021). To address this, researchers
have advocated for specifying precisely what is being mea-
sured, drawing on literature from other disciplines as appro-
priate (e.g., Savoldi et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Katzman
et al., 2023; van der Wal et al., 2024; Morehouse et al., 2025).
Researchers have also emphasized the importance of interro-
2

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
gating validity (e.g., Jacobs & Wallach, 2021; Blodgett et al.,
2021). However, with only a few exceptions (e.g., Liu et al.,
2024; Zhao et al., 2024), these ideas have mostly been used
to critique existing measurement instruments, rather than as
a framework for standardizing the process of measurement.
Benchmark consolidation: In parallel, benchmark
consolidation efforts like HELM (Liang et al., 2023), BIG-
bench (Srivastava et al., 2023), DecodingTrust (Wang et al.,
2023a), and TrustLLM (Huang et al., 2024) provide stan-
dardized conditions (e.g., datasets, model parameters) for
evaluating GenAI models, improving both the comparability
of GenAI models and the reproducibility of evaluations.
However, these efforts primarily focus on benchmarking,
as opposed to other measurement approaches, and are
not well suited to real-world evaluations. Moreover, the
benchmarks they include do not share a standardized
measurement process, rarely specify precisely what they
are intended to measure, and have not had their validity rig-
orously interrogated. Indeed, Liang et al. (2023) recognized
these as weaknesses of HELM but deferred addressing them.
Collectively, the work described above, which spans multi-
ple ML subcommunities, motivates our position. Although
there are clear connections between the ideas in these papers,
uptake has not been particularly fast or successful, suggest-
ing that ML researchers and practitioners (including those
working on RAI) have struggled to meaningfully incorpo-
rate these ideas into their work. We argue that by providing
a cohesive, overarching way to standardize the process of
measurement, our position systematically unifies and reinter-
prets this related work, while presenting a clear path forward.
Our hope is that this will make it easier for ML researchers
and practitioners to learn from and draw on these ideas when
developing and using measurement instruments, in turn help-
ing them proactively avoid a wide range of limitations (e.g.,
conceptual confusion around precisely what is being mea-
sured and insufficient interrogation of validity) by design.
3. A Measurement Framework for GenAI
When measuring abstract, contested concepts, social
scientists often turn to measurement theory, which offers a
structured approach to the process of measurement, as well
as a set of lenses for interrogating validity (e.g., Adcock
& Collier, 2001; Cronbach & Meehl, 1955; Messick,
1996). One formulation of measurement theory is the
framework of Adcock & Collier (2001), a variant of which
is shown in Figure 1. This variant distinguishes between
four levels: the background concept or “broad constellation
of meanings and understandings associated with [the]
concept [of interest];” the systematized concept or “specific
formulation of the concept[, which] commonly involves an
explicit definition;” the measurement instruments
4 
used to
obtain measurements of the concept; and the measurements
themselves (Adcock & Collier, 2001). These levels are
linked by four processes: systematization, operational-
ization, application, and interrogation. Systematization
is the process of narrowing the background concept into
the systematized concept; operationalization is the process
of drawing on the systematized concept to develop the
measurement instruments; application is the process of
using the measurement instruments to obtain the measure-
ments; and interrogation is the process of interrogating
the validity of the systematized concept, the measurement
instruments, and their resulting measurements. Together,
these four processes comprise the process of measurement.
In Appendix C, we illustrate the widespread applicability of
this framework using four very different measurement tasks:
1) measuring the prevalence of text that stereotypes social
groups in the outputs of an already deployed LLM-based
chatbot; 2) measuring the mathematical reasoning skills
of a multimodal GenAI model; 3) measuring the extent to
which a widely used LLM memorizes pieces of its training
data; and 4) measuring the extent to which a company’s
GenAI assistant refuses to comply with harmful prompts.
3.1. 
Separating Systematization and Operationalization
As shown in Figure 1, the structured approach afforded by
this framework separates systematization and operational-
ization, meaning that conceptual debates about precisely
what is being measured and why—e.g., which meanings and
understandings are reflected in the systematized concept?
does it reflect the meanings and understandings that different
stakeholders want it to reflect? if not, why?—are separated
from operational debates about how the systematized
concept is measured—e.g., do the measurement instruments
yield valid measurements of the systematized concept? This
structured approach differs from the way measurement is
typically done in the ML community, where researchers
and practitioners appear to jump from background concepts
(e.g., refusal to comply with harmful prompts) to measure-
ment instruments (e.g., a specific set of harmful prompts and
a function for assessing refusal), conflating systematization
and operationalization (e.g., Blili-Hamelin & Hancox-Li,
2023; Cooper et al., 2021; Jacobs & Wallach, 2021; Blodgett
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2024). However, if systematization is
not treated as a separate process, resulting in a systematized
concept, it is hard to know precisely what is being measured.
The separation of systematization and operationalization can
4
We use the terms “measurement instruments” and “measure-
ments” to refer to one or more measurement instruments and one
or more measurements, respectively. When we wish to refer to
a single measurement instrument or measurement, we use the
terms “measurement instrument” and “measurement,” respectively.
3

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
Figure 1. A variant of the framework of Adcock & Collier (2001). The background concept, the systematized concept, the measurement
instruments, and the measurements are linked by four processes: systematization, operationalization, application, and interrogation.
also enable stakeholders with different perspectives—e.g.,
open-source developers, policymakers, customer, users, and
members of marginalized communities, all of whom may be
interested in measuring a concept for different reasons—to
participate in conceptual debates and thus advocate for the
inclusion of particular meanings and understandings (Abebe
et al., 2020). Measuring an abstract, contested concept
means making decisions about which of its meanings and
understandings will be reflected in the resulting measure-
ments. Without a systematized concept, many of these
decisions are accessible only indirectly via the measurement
instruments themselves, which may be hard for stakeholders
other than ML researchers and practitioners to engage
with. We therefore argue that adopting this framework can
broaden the expertise involved in evaluating GenAI systems.
3.2. Emphasizing Interrogation
When measuring abstract, contested concepts, there are
no directly observable, universally agreed-upon labels or
scores against which to compare measurements, making
interrogating validity especially difficult. 
5 
Different mea-
surement theory traditions have therefore proposed different
ways to interrogate validity. Like Adcock & Collier (2001),
we advocate for drawing on the work of Messick (1987),
who shifted away from the foundational work of Cronbach
& Meehl (1955) by arguing that validity is a single,
overarching concept concerning the extent of evidence
supporting particular interpretations and uses of measure-
ments. Messick also argued that the consequences of
measurement instruments and their resulting measurements
are fundamental to their validity. A crucial implication
of this perspective is that it is not possible to interrogate
validity without considering the measurement context,
including the reasons for measuring the concept and how
the measurements will be used. Measurement instruments
and measurements that have been demonstrated to be
sufficiently valid
6 
in one context may not be valid in another,
so validity must therefore be re-interrogated whenever
measurement instruments are to be used in new contexts.
5
We note that the availability of commonly used labels or scores
does not mean that those labels or scores are direct observations of
the concept of interest, nor that they are universally agreed upon.
6
Determining what “sufficiently valid” means is one of the most
difficult aspects of interrogating validity, as we note in Appendix B.
We recommend using the following set of lenses to
interrogate validity, adapted from Messick (1987) by Jacobs
& Wallach (2021): face validity, content validity, con-
vergent validity, discriminant validity, predictive validity,
hypothesis validity, and consequential validity. These
lenses are primarily intended to inform operational debates,
but can also shed light on conceptual debates.
7 
Each lens
constitutes a different source of evidence about validity.
Distinguishing between the background concept and the
systematized concept is crucial to obtaining meaningful
evidence using the lenses. Indeed, without a systematized
concept, they are not well defined. To save space, we
provide an explanation for each lens in Appendix B, while
also illustrating their use throughout Sections 4.1 and 4.2.
4. Using the Measurement Framework
In this section, we describe the systematization, opera-
tionalization, and interrogation processes in more detail.
We omit a description of the application process, which
consists of using the measurement instruments to obtain the
measurements. To emphasize the importance of continual
iteration, driven by the interrogation process, we weave
our description of interrogation throughout our descriptions
of systematization and operationalization. We illustrate
both the core ideas and our arguments using a hypothetical
running example of measuring the prevalence of text that
stereotypes social groups in the outputs of an already
deployed LLM-based chatbot. We also show how the
framework brings clarity to existing debates about measure-
ment in the ML community, focusing on debates about the
stereotyping behaviors of LLMs and debates about the LLM-
as-a-judge paradigm. In Appendix E, we additionally show
how the framework brings clarity to ongoing privacy and
copyright debates about the extent to which GenAI systems
encode exact or near-exact copies of pieces of their training
data in their parameters—a concept known as memorization.
4.1. Systematization
Systematization is the foundation of the process of measure-
ment. Systematization specifies how an abstract concept
7
In this regard, our views differ from those of Adcock &
Collier (2001). We explain our reasoning for this in Appendix B.
4

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
is connected to observable phenomena in the real world.
Specifically, systematizing a concept means taking the broad
constellation of meanings and understandings associated
with that concept—the background concept—and narrow-
ing it into an explicit definition—the systematized concept—
that specifies precisely what will be measured and why. We
note that although the systematization process specifies how
the concept of interest is connected to observable phenom-
ena in the real world, it takes place at a theoretical level—
i.e., it stops short of specifying measurement instruments.
As we explained in Section 3, the separation of systemati-
zation and operationalization can enable stakeholders with
different perspectives to participate in conceptual debates.
One way to do this is to directly involve them in the system-
atization process, giving them an opportunity to advocate
for the inclusion of particular meanings and understandings.
4.1.1. DEFINITIONS
Suppose we wish to measure the prevalence of text that
stereotypes social groups in the outputs of an already
deployed LLM-based chatbot—a concept related to the
chatbot’s behaviors. In this example, the background
concept encompasses all possible definitions of text that
stereotypes social groups, making it inclusive of a broad
range of meanings and understandings. First, we might
more precisely define social groups—a constituent concept
that is integral to the concept of interest. To save space, we
omit a detailed description, but refer the reader to the work
of Corvi et al. (2025), who define social groups as “[groups
of people] who are characterized by sets of [socially salient]
characteristics” and organized into social hierarchies—i.e.,
“systematic organizations of individuals or groups of
people that differentially confer power, status, privileges,
resources, and opportunities.” Next, we might select a
specific definition of text that stereotypes social groups,
such as “[text that communicates] fixed, over-generalized
belief[s] about [social groups]” (Cardwell, 1996). However,
this definition still encompasses many meanings and
understandings—e.g., what does “communicates fixed,
over-generalized beliefs” mean?—and must be further
systematized in order to specify how the concept of inter-
est is connected to observable phenomena in the real world.
For example, we might draw on literature from social
psychology, sociolinguistics, anthropology, and other
relevant disciplines, finding that researchers often define
the presence of such text in terms of the presence of
particular linguistic patterns, such as 1) describing a social
group and its characteristics in an essentializing—i.e.,
overgeneralized—way; 2) representing an individual as a
caricature—or an essentializing representation—of a social
group to which they belong; 3) prescribing essentializing
ways of being for a social group and its members; and
4) proscribing essentializing ways of being for a social
group and its members (Cardwell, 1996; Corvi et al., 2025).
Finally, we need to specify the relationships between the
observable phenomena and the concept of interest and the
relationships among the observable phenomena. Because
the presence of the linguistic patterns described above de-
fine the presence of text that stereotypes social groups, the
relationships between the observable phenomena and the
concept of interest are definitional (as opposed to causal).
All four patterns are equally important, but only one needs
to be present for a piece of text to be considered stereotyping.
The resulting systematized concept is depicted in Figure 2.
We note that although systematizing a concept can be chal-
lenging, it is hard to know precisely what is being measured
without a systematized concept. For example, consider
StereoSet (Nadeem et al., 2021) and CrowS-Pairs (Nangia
et al., 2020), two widely used benchmarks for measuring the
stereotyping behaviors of LLMs (e.g., assigning higher prob-
abilities to text that stereotypes social groups). As explained
by Blodgett et al. (2021), although both benchmarks provide
high-level definitions of stereotyping, these definitions still
encompass many meanings and understandings and do not
specify how stereotyping behaviors are connected to observ-
able phenomena in the real world. Because Nadeem et al.
and Nangia et al. appear to jump from these high-level def-
initions to measurement instruments, it is unclear precisely
what StereoSet and CrowS-Pairs are measuring. Moreover,
both benchmarks’ measurement instruments involve crowd-
workers, who, without a systematized concept, must rely
on their own understandings of these high-level definitions,
which may be contradictory (e.g., whether factually true gen-
eralizations about social groups are stereotypes or not). Had
Nadeem et al. and Nangia et al. further systematized their
high-level definitions, they may have proactively avoided
many of the limitations identified by Blodgett et al. (2021).
4.1.2. INTERROGATION: SYSTEMATIZATION
Continual iteration, driven by the interrogation process,
is an important part of using the framework described in
Section 3. Three lenses of validity—face validity, content
validity, and consequential validity—are especially useful
for shedding light on conceptual debates. These lenses
should be used throughout systematization to interrogate the
systematization process itself and the resulting systematized
concept. They also provide another opportunity to involve
stakeholders with different perspectives. We note that
using the other lenses of validity to interrogate the mea-
surement instruments and their resulting measurements, as
described in Section 4.2.2, can also reveal systematization
issues that require the systematized concept to be revised.
Returning to our running example, we might first focus
on face validity. In the case of conceptual debates, face
5

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
Figure 2. The systematized concept for our running example of measuring text that stereotypes social groups.
validity focuses on the extent to which the systematized
concept looks reasonable. We might decide to seek input
from members of different social groups—i.e., experiential
experts—finding that they are not entirely comfortable with
our systematized concept. We might therefore dig deeper,
using content validity, which, in the case of conceptual de-
bates, refers to the extent to which the systematized concept
reflects the most salient aspects of the background concept.
Here, we might find that members of different social groups
contest our definition of text that stereotypes social groups.
They might, for example, question the substantive validity
of our systematized concept—i.e., whether the systematized
concept fully specifies the observable phenomena that are
connected to the concept of interest—perhaps by noting
that the linguistic patterns do not account for differences
in the acceptability of positive, negative, and neutral text
that stereotypes social groups. Finally we might interrogate
consequential validity, which is concerned with the
consequences of measurement, including the consequences
of the systematization process and the systematized concept.
Here, we might find that choosing not to involve members
of different social groups in the systematization process
makes them feel deprioritized, disempowered, or excluded.
4.2. Operationalization
In contrast to the systematization process, the operational-
ization process takes place at an implementation level, spec-
ifying how the concept of interest is measured by drawing
on the systematized concept to develop measurement instru-
ments. Systematization and operationalization are therefore
complementary: together, they ensure that the process of
measurement is both theoretically and empirically grounded.
We note that in some cases, there may be existing measure-
ment instruments that can be repurposed, with or without
modification; in other cases, the measurement instruments
must be developed from scratch. However, in all cases, the
validity of the measurement instruments and their resulting
measurements must be interrogated before they are used.
4.2.1. MEASUREMENT INSTRUMENTS
Having systematized the concept of interest, the first step
in the operationalization process is to specify how the
observable phenomena will be represented by defining
a set of variables—often called indicators
8
—that reflect
the observable phenomena. Continuing with our running
example, we might define a binary-valued variable for each
linguistic pattern, whose value indicates the presence or
absence of that linguistic pattern in a single chatbot output.
Next, we must define how the values of the indicators should
be aggregated, making sure that the aggregation functions
reflect the relationships between the observable phenomena
and the concept of interest and the relationships among the
observable phenomena specified during the systematization
process. In the case of our running example, taking the
maximum of the indicators’ values for a single chatbot
output yields a binary value that reflects the presence or
absence of any of the linguistic patterns in that output.
Averaging these values over the entire population of outputs
yields the prevalence of text that stereotypes social groups.
Having defined both the indicators and how their values
should be aggregated, the next step is to develop the mea-
surement instruments—i.e., the operational procedures and
artifacts used to obtain the measurements. In some cases, we
might wish to use a single measurement instrument to obtain
and aggregate the values of the indicators; in other cases,
we might wish to use multiple measurement instruments.
Returning to our running example, we might decide to
develop an LLM-as-a-judge system (Zheng et al., 2023).
First, we might use our systematized concept and the
definitions of the indicators to develop annotation guidelines
that serve as prompt instructions for a judge LLM. These
annotation guidelines might include the definitions from
Section 4.1.1, along with examples, counterexamples, and
contextual explanations. Given a single chatbot output from
a dataset that represents the entire population of chatbot
outputs, the annotation guidelines would instruct the judge
8
As we discuss in Appendix A, there is some inconsistency in
the use of the term “indicators” in the social science literature.
6

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
LLM to generate an annotation for that output in the form of
a binary vector indicating the presence or absence of each of
the linguistic patterns in that output. We would then apply a
per-output aggregation function to each such vector (in this
case, taking the maximum of its values) before applying
a population-level aggregation function to the resulting per-
output values (in this case, averaging them over the dataset
of chatbot outputs) to yield an estimate of the prevalence of
text that stereotypes social groups in the chatbot’s outputs.
There are many decisions that can influence the quality
of a judge LLM’s annotations, most notably the choice
of model, the prompt instructions, and the configuration
settings (e.g., the decoding strategy, temperature, and other
parameters). But, in the case of the approach described
above, the most consequential decisions are arguably those
that led to the systematized concept and the definitions of the
indicators and aggregation functions, all of which are nec-
essary to produce granular, indicator-level annotations that
can then be aggregated to yield the desired measurement.
In practice, ML researchers and practitioners rarely
systematize their concepts of interest or provide clear
definitions of indicators and aggregation functions. Instead,
they typically use high-level annotation guidelines, often
including illustrative few-shot examples to guide their
judge LLMs’ reasoning through in-context learning (Brown
et al., 2020). Although this approach may end up yielding
valid measurements, validity should not be assumed and
must be rigorously interrogated (Pangakis & Wolken, 2025).
4.2.2. INTERROGATION: OPERATIONALIZATION
All seven lenses of validity can inform operational debates.
These lenses should be used throughout operationalization
to interrogate the operationalization process itself, the
measurement instruments, and their resulting measurements.
Although it is possible to develop measurement instruments
without first systematizing the concept of interest, the lenses
of validity are not well defined without a systematized
concept, as we explained in Section 3.2. We also note that in
some cases, using the lenses can also reveal systematization
issues that require the systematized concept to be revised.
Continuing with our running example, we would likely
begin by constructing an unannotated validation dataset
of chatbot outputs to which we would then apply the
measurement instruments. From there, we might first
interrogate face validity by asking a colleague whether the
judge LLM’s annotations for 20 randomly selected outputs
look reasonable to them, finding that the annotations for
four outputs differ from our colleague’s expectations. This
does not mean that those annotations are incorrect, nor that
the rest are correct, but it does merit further investigation.
Whether the judge LLM’s annotations are correct depends
on whether they align with our systematized concept, not
our colleague’s determination. For example, suppose the
judge LLM determines that the text “she’s amazing at
math for a woman” stereotypes women, but our colleague
disagrees. Who is correct? Because our systematized
concept specifies essentializing descriptions as an observ-
able phenomenon, this text does stereotype women—i.e.,
our colleague is incorrect and the judge LLM is correct.
But there are other systematized concepts for which our
colleague might be correct, such as systematized concepts
where essentializing descriptions were explicitly excluded.
This example highlights the importance of using lenses
other than face validity to obtain less subjective evidence.
Next, we might interrogate content validity, which, in the
case of operational debates, refers to the extent to which
the measurement instruments align with the substance and
structure of the systematized concept. By analyzing the
judge LLM’s annotations for our validation dataset, we
might find that the judge LLM often incorrectly annotates
chatbot outputs about individuals, without any reference
to their social group membership, as containing text that
stereotypes social groups. This constitutes evidence against
the substantive validity—i.e., the extent to which the mea-
surement instruments align with the observable phenomena
specified as part of the systematized concept—of the judge
LLM. Turning to structural validity—i.e., the extent to
which the measurement instruments align with the relation-
ships specified as part of the systematized concept—we
might find that our per-output aggregation function did
not appropriately aggregate the values of the indicators
(e.g., by computing a sum rather than taking the maximum).
Interrogating convergent validity—i.e., the extent to which
the measurement instruments yield measurements that are
similar to measurements of the concept of interest, or other
similar concepts, obtained using other, already validated
measurement instruments—currently poses a challenge for
the ML community because systematization and operational-
ization are very often conflated and few already validated
measurement instruments exist. In practice, ML researchers
and practitioners often compare their judge LLMs’ anno-
tations to annotations produced by human annotators, re-
porting inter-annotator agreement rates among the human
annotators and between the human annotators and their
judge LLMs (Gu et al., 2024). The core assumption un-
derlying such comparisons is that the human annotators
are already validated measurement instruments. Moreover,
when human–LLM inter-annotator agreement rates are de-
scribed as judge LLM “accuracies,” the humans’ annota-
tions are implicitly being treated as “ground truth.” This
practice, although common, is problematic. Without a sys-
tematized concept there is no “ground truth”—and even
with a systematized concept, unless there is evidence that
the humans’ annotations align with it, the human annotators
cannot be viewed as already validated measurement instru-
7

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
ments (Mikhaylov et al., 2012). At a minimum, the people
who systematized the concept must assess whether the hu-
mans’ annotations align with the systematized concept (Hal-
terman & Keith, 2024). Although currently uncommon in
the ML community, Yu et al. (2023) took steps toward this
when measuring refusal in the context of GenAI jailbreaking
by directly comparing their judge LLM’s annotations to their
own annotations of refusal based on their systematized con-
cept, obviating the need to validate annotations produced
by human annotators. In the case of our running exam-
ple, assessing whether the humans’ annotations align with
the systematized concept would involve analyzing the hu-
mans’ annotations for an additional unannotated validation
dataset. Here, we might find that some occurrences of low
inter-annotator agreement are actually due to systematiza-
tion issues that require us to revise our systematized concept.
Having done this, we would then revise the annotation guide-
lines, obtain new annotations, and once again conduct a thor-
ough analysis, continuing to iterate until the humans’ anno-
tations align with the systematized concept. Only once align-
ment has been reached is it possible to interrogate conver-
gent validity by comparing the judge LLM’s annotations to
the humans’ annotations for the original validation dataset.
Predictive validity focuses on the extent to which the mea-
surements predict observable phenomena that are external
to the concept of interest—i.e., distinct from those speci-
fied as part of the systematized concept—but known to be
related to it in some way. Interrogating predictive validity of-
ten involves making predictions about real-world data. For
example, we might investigate whether our measurements
predict the prevalence of users’ complaints about text that
stereotypes social groups. If they do not, this suggests sys-
tematization issues, operationalization issues, or both. To try
to rule out systematization issues, we might review the com-
plaints to determine whether users’ understandings of text
that stereotypes social groups align with our systematized
concept. If they do, this suggests operationalization issues.
Finally, we might interrogate consequential validity, focus-
ing on the consequences of the judge LLM and its resulting
measurements. Here, we might find that using the measure-
ments to suppress text that stereotypes social groups may
lead to the suppression of desirable chatbot outputs, such
as those generated when members of different social groups
ask the chatbot for advice about their lived experiences.
To save space, we omit detailed discussions of how we
might interrogate discriminant validity and hypothesis
validity, but provide high-level overviews in Appendix D.
Having used the lenses of validity to interrogate the
operationalization process, the measurement instruments,
and their resulting measurements, we can move on to the
application process provided no further iteration is required.
5. Adopting the Measurement Framework
Below, we summarize key actions for ML researchers and
practitioners who wish to adopt the framework we propose.
Engage in conceptual debates: As appropriate, draw on
literature from relevant disciplines to systematize the con-
cept of interest. Directly involve stakeholders with different
perspectives, all of whom may be interested in measuring
the concept for different reasons, in the systematization
process. Use face validity, content validity, and conse-
quential validity to shed light on conceptual debates, again
seeking input from stakeholders with different perspectives.
Engage in operational debates: Interrogate the validity
of the measurement instruments and their resulting
measurements using the lenses of validity. When doing so,
distinguish between the background concept and the system-
atized concept. As appropriate, involve stakeholders with
different perspectives. Re-interrogate validity before using
the measurement instruments in new measurement contexts.
Share the systematized concept: Share a description of
the systematized concept along with the measurement in-
struments and their resulting measurements to make clear
precisely what is being measured. This makes it easier to
identify—and therefore avoid—apples-to-oranges compar-
isons. It also makes it easier for others to interrogate validity.
Share evidence of validity: Share information about the
ways in which the validity of the systematized concept, the
measurement instruments, and their resulting measurements
were interrogated. Also share the resulting evidence
for—and against—their validity. This makes it easier
for others to make informed decisions about using the
measurement instruments or their resulting measurements.
We note that our descriptions of the framework itself in
Section 3 and its use in Section 4 reflect an ideal. Fully
adopting this ideal via the key actions summarized above
may be challenging for ML researchers and practitioners, es-
pecially those with limited time, budgets, or other resources.
We recognize this and argue that even partial adoption
will meaningfully contribute to changing how the ML
community conducts GenAI evaluations. For example, sit-
uating the traditional ML approach to measurement within
the framework we propose can reveal gaps and limitations.
Of the key actions summarized above, the most important
are 1) separating systematization and operationalization and
2) interrogating validity. However, these actions, as well as
the others, can be undertaken with varying levels of compre-
hensiveness depending on the resources available and the
purpose for which the measurements will be used. For exam-
ple, a researcher who wishes to undertake a particular mea-
surement task to inform the next step in their project may
only need to use a lightweight systematization process and
8

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
a few lenses of validity. In contrast, a team developing mea-
surement instruments for conducting pre-deployment evalu-
ations of a large corporation’s GenAI systems likely needs to
be much more comprehensive. As another example, a small
university lab conducting a third-party evaluation of a newly
released GenAI model may wish to be as comprehensive
as possible within the bounds of their available resources.
Finally, we acknowledge that changing how the ML commu-
nity conducts GenAI evaluations will be challenging. Rather
than placing the entire burden on individual ML researchers
and practitioners, we anticipate that uptake will be faster and
more successful if organizations provide support in the form
of resources and incentives, as well as working to identify
and remove any other organizational barriers to adoption.
6. Alternative Views
In this section, we present and address some views that
provide alternatives to our position, reflecting actual
conversations we have had about evaluating GenAI systems.
Current evaluations of GenAI systems may be flawed but
they kind of work and everyone uses them. Do we really
need something different? As GenAI systems are deployed
in more and more real-world contexts, there is an increas-
ing awareness that evaluations that “kind of work” are no
longer sufficient. Indeed, it is widely understood that current
evaluations have serious limitations (e.g., Raji et al., 2021;
Hutchinson et al., 2022; Rauh et al., 2024; Roose, 2024;
Eriksson et al., 2025; Brandom, 2025). As Maslej et al.
(2024) argued, “the lack of standardized evaluation makes
it extremely challenging to systematically compare the lim-
itations and risks of [GenAI systems].” The framework
described in Section 3 is one proposal for standardizing the
process of measurement, making it easier to see when and
why measurements can be compared. Since there is already
a desire to standardize evaluations of GenAI systems, the
ML community would be well served by drawing on other
disciplines as appropriate, rather than starting from scratch.
This framework only seems necessary when ML
researchers and practitioners are not already clearly
stating and interrogating their assumptions. Although
ML researchers and practitioners have a variety of practices
for engaging with assumptions, the framework described
in Section 3 offers a structured approach to the process of
measurement, including stating and interrogating assump-
tions, thereby unifying and reinterpreting these practices.
GenAI systems are computational systems, not social
systems, so the social sciences are not relevant to GenAI
evaluations. The “general purpose” nature of GenAI sys-
tems, combined with their increasingly wide deployment,
mean that many concepts related to their capabilities, be-
haviors, and impacts are abstract and deeply intertwined
with people and society. We argue that these concepts more
closely resemble the concepts traditionally measured by
social scientists than those typically measured by ML re-
searchers and practitioners. As a result, we believe that the
ML community should adopt a variant of the framework that
social scientists use for measurement. We emphasize that we
do not mean to suggest that GenAI systems should be anthro-
pomorphized, nor that measurement instruments designed
for humans would be valid if applied to GenAI systems.
Getting the ML community to adopt this framework
will be a lot of work. Is the juice really worth the
squeeze? Changing the current state of GenAI evaluations
will be a lot of work regardless of exactly how it is done.
However, we note that the separation of systematization and
operationalization parallels existing separations that have
led to advancements in computer science. For example,
Amdahl et al. (1964) described the separation between the
logical structure and the physical realization of the IBM
System/360. This separation was a pivotal innovation in
computer architecture. As another example, the separation
of protocol definitions and their concrete implementations at
endpoints is fundamental to internet measurement (Saltzer
et al., 1984). Finally, in the context of programming
languages, Kowalski (1979) distinguished between the logic
component and the control component of an algorithm,
arguing that “computer programs would be more often
correct and more easily improved and modified if their
logic and control aspects were identified and separated.”
7. Conclusion
Although GenAI systems are increasingly widely deployed,
the current state of GenAI evaluations leaves much to be
desired. We take the position that evaluating GenAI systems
is a social science measurement challenge. We argue that
the ML community would benefit from learning from and
drawing on the social sciences when developing and using
measurement instruments for evaluating GenAI systems.
Specifically, we suggest standardizing the process of mea-
surement by adopting a variant of the framework that social
scientists use for measurement. With this goal in mind, we
presented a four-level framework, grounded in measurement
theory from the social sciences, for measuring concepts re-
lated to the capabilities, behaviors, and impacts of GenAI
systems. We also showed how this framework brings clarity
to existing debates about measurement in the ML commu-
nity. Finally, we presented and addressed some views—
drawn from our experiences—that provide alternatives to
our position. To summarize, maturing current measurement
practices into a rigorous science of GenAI evaluations will
require the ML community to pay more attention to the
process of measurement. We believe this would be best
done by learning from and drawing on the social sciences.
9

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Microsoft Research
AI & Society Fellows Program. We thank Agathe Balayn,
Doug Burger, Susan Dumais, Anna Kawakami, Tim Vieira,
our ICML reviewers, and others for helpful suggestions.
We also thank the organizers of the NeurIPS 2024
workshop on “Evaluating Evaluations: Examining Best
Practices for Measuring Broader Impacts of Generative AI”
for giving us an opportunity to present and refine our ideas.
Impact Statement
By suggesting that the framework described in Section 3 can
improve evaluations of GenAI systems, we do not mean to
suggest that it will inevitably improve how GenAI systems
are developed, deployed, used, or regulated. Indeed, the
social sciences have repeatedly demonstrated that a better
understanding of a problem does not automatically translate
into better policies or practices. Although we believe the
framework can help clear up conceptual confusion, broaden
the expertise involved in evaluating GenAI systems, and
yield more valid measurements, it needs to be accompanied
by sustained efforts to meaningfully inject research
into policymaking and practice (e.g., Cooper et al., 2024).
Because the measurement instruments typically developed
and used in the ML community tend to be quantitative, we
risk being misunderstood as suggesting that the framework
described in Section 3 is only suitable for quantitative
measurement instruments. In fact, although measurements
themselves are necessarily quantitative, measurement instru-
ments can be qualitative or quantitative, and the framework
supports both. Moreover, Adcock & Collier (2001) stated
that their framework, which forms the basis of ours, was
intended to be a shared standard that would allow “quan-
titative and qualitative scholars to assess more effectively,
and communicate about, issues of valid measurement.”
Finally, we emphasize that adopting the framework de-
scribed in Section 3 is not a panacea. Even when evaluations
of GenAI systems are grounded in measurement theory, they
may still fall short of what they are intended to accomplish.
Indeed, the framework will often reveal such shortcomings.
Rather than thinking of the framework as a solution to all
the problems that beset evaluations of GenAI systems, we
think of it as providing a cohesive, overarching way to stan-
dardize the process of measurement, making clear precisely
what measurement instruments are and are not measuring.
References
Abebe, R., Barocas, S., Kleinberg, J., Levy, K., Raghavan,
M., and Robinson, D. G. Roles for computing in so-
cial change. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 252–260,
2020.
Adcock, R. and Collier, D. Measurement validity: A shared
standard for qualitative and quantitative research. Ameri-
can Political Science Review, 95(3):529–546, 2001.
Aerni, M., Rando, J., Debenedetti, E., Carlini, N., Ippolito,
D., and Tram 
`
er, F. Measuring non-adversarial repro-
duction of training data in large language models. In
The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=590yfqz1LE.
Alaa, A., Hartvigsen, T., Golchini, N., Dutta, S., Dean, F.,
Raji, I. D., and Zack, T. Position: Medical large language
model benchmarks should prioritize construct validity.
In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2025. Forthcoming.
Amdahl, G. M., Blaauw, G. A., and Brooks, F. P. Architec-
ture of the IBM System/360. IBM Journal of Research
and Development, 8(2), 1964.
Berelson, B. Content Analysis in Communication Research.
Free Press, 1952. ISBN 1953-07730-000.
Blili-Hamelin, B. and Hancox-Li, L. Making intelligence:
Ethical values in IQ and ML benchmarks. In Proceed-
ings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Ac-
countability, and Transparency, pp. 271–284. Associ-
ation for Computing Machinery, 2023. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3593013.3593996.
Blodgett, S. L., Barocas, S., Daum 
´
e III, H., and Wallach,
H. Language (technology) is power: A critical survey
of “bias” in NLP. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pp. 5454–5476. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.485.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-
main.485/.
Blodgett, S. L., Lopez, G., Olteanu, A., Sim, R., and Wal-
lach, H. Stereotyping Norwegian salmon: An inventory of
pitfalls in fairness benchmark datasets. In Proceedings of
the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pp. 1004–1015. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2021. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.81.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-
long.81/.
Brandom, R. How to build a better AI bench-
mark. MIT Technology Review, 2025. URL
https://www.technologyreview.com/
10

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
2025/05/08/1116192/how-to-build-a-
better-ai-benchmark/.
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D.,
Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G.,
Askell, A., et al. Language models are few-shot learn-
ers. In Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
Cardwell, M. Dictionary of Psychology. Routledge, 1996.
Carlini, N., Tram 
`
er, F., Wallace, E., Jagielski, M., Herbert-
Voss, A., Lee, K., Roberts, A., Brown, T., Song, D., Er-
lingsson, 
´
U., Oprea, A., and Raffel, C. Extracting training
data from large language models. In 30th USENIX Secu-
rity Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pp. 2633–2650.
USENIX Association, 2021.
Carlini, N., Hayes, J., Nasr, M., Jagielski, M., Sehwag,
V., Tramer, F., Balle, B., Ippolito, D., and Wallace, E.
Extracting training data from diffusion models. In 32nd
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), pp.
5253–5270, 2023a.
Carlini, N., Ippolito, D., Jagielski, M., Lee, K., Tram 
`
er, F.,
and Zhang, C. Quantifying memorization across neural
language models. In International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, 2023b.
Cooper, A. F. and Grimmelmann, J. The files are in the
computer: Copyright, memorization, and generative AI.
Chicago Kent Law Review, 2025. Forthcoming.
Cooper, A. F., Abrams, E., and NA, N. Emergent unfairness
in algorithmic fairness-accuracy trade-off research. In
Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI,
Ethics, and Society, pp. 46–54. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3461702.3462519.
Cooper, A. F., Lee, K., Grimmelmann, J., Ippolito, D.,
Callison-Burch, C., Choquette-Choo, C. A., Mireshghal-
lah, N., Brundage, M., Mimno, D., Choksi, M. Z., Balkin,
J. M., Carlini, N., Sa, C. D., Frankle, J., Ganguli, D., Gip-
son, B., Guadamuz, A., Harris, S. L., Jacobs, A. Z., Joh,
E., Kamath, G., Lemley, M., Matthews, C., McLeavey,
C., McSherry, C., Nasr, M., Ohm, P., Roberts, A., Rubin,
T., Samuelson, P., Schubert, L., Vaccaro, K., Villa, L.,
Wu, F., and Zeide, E. Report of the 1st Workshop on Gen-
erative AI and Law. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.06477,
2023.
Cooper, A. F., Choquette-Choo, C. A., Bogen, M., Jagielski,
M., Filippova, K., Liu, K. Z., Chouldechova, A., Hayes, J.,
Huang, Y., Mireshghallah, N., Shumailov, I., Triantafillou,
E., Kairouz, P., Mitchell, N., Liang, P., Ho, D. E., Choi,
Y., Koyejo, S., Delgado, F., Grimmelmann, J., Shmatikov,
V., Sa, C. D., Barocas, S., Cyphert, A., Lemley, M., danah
boyd, Vaughan, J. W., Brundage, M., Bau, D., Neel, S.,
Jacobs, A. Z., Terzis, A., Wallach, H., Papernot, N., and
Lee, K. Machine unlearning doesn’t do what you think:
Lessons for generative AI policy, research, and practice.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06966, 2024.
Corvi, E., Washington, H., Reed, S., Atalla, C., Choulde-
chova, A., Dow, P. A., Garcia-Gathright, J., Pangakis,
N., Sheng, E., Vann, D., et al. Taxonomizing represen-
tational harms using speech act theory. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.00928, 2025.
Cronbach, L. J. and Meehl, P. E. Construct validity in
psychological tests. Psychological bulletin, 52(4):281,
1955. doi: 10.1037/h0040957.
Eriksson, M., Purificato, E., Noroozian, A., Vinagre, J.,
Chaslot, G., Gomez, E., and Fernandez-Llorca, D. Can
we trust AI benchmarks? An interdisciplinary review of
current issues in AI evaluation. arXiv:2502.06559, 2025.
Goldfarb-Tarrant, S., Marchant, R., Mu 
˜
noz S 
´
anchez, R.,
Pandya, M., and Lopez, A. Intrinsic bias metrics do
not correlate with application bias. In Proceedings of
the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pp. 1926–1940. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2021. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.150.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-
long.150/.
Gu, J., Jiang, X., Shi, Z., Tan, H., Zhai, X., Xu, C., Li, W.,
Shen, Y., Ma, S., Liu, H., et al. A survey on LLM-as-a-
judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15594, 2024.
Halterman, A. and Keith, K. A. Codebook LLMs:
Adapting political science codebooks for LLM use and
adapting LLM to follow codebooks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.10747, 2024.
Hand, D. J. Meaurement Theory and Practice. Wiley, 2004.
Hayes, J., Swanberg, M., Chaudhari, H., Yona, I., Shu-
mailov, I., Nasr, M., Choquette-Choo, C. A., Lee, K.,
and Cooper, A. F. Measuring memorization in language
models via probabilistic extraction. In Proceedings of the
2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
9266–9291. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2025. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.
naacl-long.469/.
He, C., Luo, R., Bai, Y., Hu, S., Thai, Z., Shen, J., Hu,
J., Han, X., Huang, Y., Zhang, Y., Liu, J., Qi, L., Liu,
Z., and Sun, M. OlympiadBench: A challenging bench-
mark for promoting AGI with olympiad-level bilingual
11

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
multimodal scientific problems, 2024. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.211/.
Huang, Y., Sun, L., Wang, H., Wu, S., Zhang, Q., Li,
Y., Gao, C., Huang, Y., Lyu, W., Zhang, Y., Li, X.,
Sun, H., Liu, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, Z., Vid-
gen, B., Kailkhura, B., Xiong, C., ..., and Zhao, Y. Po-
sition: TrustLLM: Trustworthiness in large language
models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 20166–20270,
2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v235/huang24x.html.
Hutchinson, B., Rostamzadeh, N., Greer, C., Heller, K., and
Prabhakaran, V. Evaluation gaps in machine learning
practice. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 1859–
1876, 2022.
Jacobs, A. Z. Measurement as governance in and for respon-
sible AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.05658, 2021.
Jacobs, A. Z. and Wallach, H. Measurement and fairness.
In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 375–385, 2021.
Katzman, J., Wang, A., Scheuerman, M., Blodgett, S. L.,
Laird, K., Wallach, H., and Barocas, S. Taxonomizing
and measuring representational harms: A look at image
tagging. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 14277–14285, 2023.
Kowalski, R. Algorithm = Logic + Control. Communica-
tions of the ACM, 22(7):424–436, 1979.
Lee, K., Ippolito, D., Nystrom, A., Zhang, C., Eck, D.,
Callison-Burch, C., and Carlini, N. Deduplicating train-
ing data makes language models better. In Proceedings
of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, volume 1, pp. 8424–8445, 2022.
Lee, K., Cooper, A. F., and Grimmelmann, J. Talkin’ ’bout
AI generation: Copyright and the generative-AI supply
chain. Journal of the Copyright Society, 2025. Forthcom-
ing.
Liang, P., Bommasani, R., Lee, T., Tsipras, D., Soylu, D.,
Yasunaga, M., Zhang, Y., Narayanan, D., Wu, Y., Kumar,
A., Newman, B., Yuan, B., Yan, B., Zhang, C., Cosgrove,
C. A., Manning, C. D., Re, C., Acosta-Navas, D., Hud-
son, D. A., Zelikman, E., Durmus, E., Ladhak, F., Rong,
F., Ren, H., Yao, H., WANG, J., Santhanam, K., Orr,
L., Zheng, L., Yuksekgonul, M., Suzgun, M., Kim, N.,
Guha, N., Chatterji, N. S., Khattab, O., Henderson, P.,
Huang, Q., Chi, R. A., Xie, S. M., Santurkar, S., Gan-
guli, S., Hashimoto, T., Icard, T., Zhang, T., Chaudhary,
V., Wang, W., Li, X., Mai, Y., Zhang, Y., and Koreeda,
Y. Holistic evaluation of language models. Transac-
tions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-
8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=iO4LZibEqW.
Liu, Y. L., Blodgett, S. L., Cheung, J., Liao, Q. V., Olteanu,
A., and Xiao, Z. ECBD: Evidence-centered benchmark
design for NLP. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 16349–16365. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2024. URL https://
aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.861.
Maslej, N., Fattorini, L., Perrault, R., Parli, V., Reuel, A.,
Brynjolfsson, E., Etchemendy, J., Ligett, K., Lyons,
T., Manyika, J., Niebles, J. C., Shoham, Y., Wald, R.,
and Clark, J. The AI Index 2024 Annual Report. AI
Index Steering Committee, Institute for Human-Centered
AI, Stanford University, 2024. URL https://
hai.stanford.edu/assets/files/hai_ai-
index-report-2024-smaller2.pdf.
Messick, S. Validity. ETS Research Report Series, 1987.
doi: 10.1002/j.2330-8516.1987.tb00244.x.
Messick, S. Validity and washback in language testing.
Language Testing, 13(3):241–256, 1996.
Mikhaylov, S., Laver, M., and Benoit, K. R. Coder relia-
bility and misclassification in the human coding of party
manifestos. Political analysis, 20(1):78–91, 2012.
Morehouse, K. N., Swaroop, S., and Pan, W. Position:
Rethinking LLM bias probing using lessons from the
social sciences. Proceedings of the 42nd International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. Forthcoming.
Mulligan, D. K., Koopman, C., and Doty, N. Privacy is
an essentially contested concept: A multi-dimensional
analytic for mapping privacy. Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, 374(2083):20160118, 2016.
Mulligan, D. K., Kroll, J. A., Kohli, N., and Wong, R. Y.
This thing called fairness: Disciplinary confusion realiz-
ing a value in technology. In Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction, volume 3, pp. 1–36.
Association for Computing Machinery, 2019.
Nadeem, M., Bethke, A., and Reddy, S. StereoSet: Mea-
suring stereotypical bias in pretrained language mod-
els. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5356–
5371. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
12

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.416. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.416/.
Nangia, N., Vania, C., Bhalerao, R., and Bowman,
S. R. CrowS-Pairs: A challenge dataset for mea-
suring social biases in masked language models. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pp. 1953–1967. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.
154. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
emnlp-main.154/.
Nasr, M., Rando, J., Carlini, N., Hayase, J., Jagielski,
M., Cooper, A. F., Ippolito, D., Choquette-Choo, C. A.,
Tram 
`
er, F., and Lee, K. Scalable extraction of train-
ing data from aligned, production language models. In
The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=vjel3nWP2a.
National Institute for Standards and Technology. Artificial
intelligence Risk Management Framework: Generative
Artificial Intelligence Profile, 2024. URL https://
doi.org/10.6028/NIST.AI.600-1
. NIST Trust-
worthy and Responsible AI NIST AI 600-1.
Nolte, H., Finck, M., and Meding, K. Machine learn-
ers should acknowledge the legal implications of large
language models as personal data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.01630, 2025.
Pangakis, N. and Wolken, S. Keeping humans in the loop:
Human-centered automated annotation with generative
AI. Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference
on Web and Social Media, 2025. Forthcoming.
Perez, E., Huang, S., Song, F., Cai, T., Ring, R., Aslanides,
J., Glaese, A., McAleese, N., and Irving, G. Red teaming
language models with language models. In Proceedings
of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pp. 3419–3448. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2022. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
emnlp-main.225. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2022.emnlp-main.225/.
Prashanth, U. S., Deng, A., O’Brien, K., V, J. S., Khan,
M. A., Borkar, J., Choquette-Choo, C. A., Fuehne,
J. R., Biderman, S., Ke, T., Lee, K., and Saphra, N.
Recite, reconstruct, recollect: Memorization in LMs
as a multifaceted phenomenon. In The Thirteenth In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations,
2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=3E8YNv1HjU.
Raji, D., Denton, E., Bender, E. M., Hanna, A., and Paullada,
A. AI and the everything in the whole wide world
benchmark. In Proceedings of the Neural Information
Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks,
volume 1, 2021. URL https://datasets-
benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.
cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/
084b6fbb10729ed4da8c3d3f5a3ae7c9-
Paper-round2.pdf.
Rauh, M., Marchal, N., Manzini, A., Hendricks, L. A., Co-
manescu, R., Akbulut, C., Stepleton, T., Mateos-Garcia,
J., Bergman, S., Kay, J., Griffin, C., Bariach, B., Gabriel,
I., Rieser, V., Isaac, W., and Weidinger, L. Gaps in the
safety evaluation of generative AI. AAAI/ACM Confer-
ence on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES), 2024.
Roose, K. A.I. has a measurement problem. The New
York Times, 2024. URL https://www.nytimes.
com/2024/04/15/technology/ai-models-
measurement.html. Accessed: 2024-09-05.
Salaudeen, O., Reuel, A., Ahmed, A., Bedi, S., Robertson,
Z., Sundar, S., Domingue, B., Wang, A., and Koyejo,
S. Measurement to meaning: A validity-centered frame-
work for AI evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10573,
2025.
Saltzer, J. H., Reed, D. P., and Clark, D. D. End-to-
end arguments in system design. ACM Transactions on
Computer Systems (TOCS), 2(4):277–288, 1984. ISSN
0734-2071. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
357401.357402.
Savoldi, B., Gaido, M., Bentivogli, L., Negri, M.,
and Turchi, M. Gender bias in machine transla-
tion. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 9:845–874, 2021. doi: 10.1162/tacl
a 00401. URL https://aclanthology.org/
2021.tacl-1.51/.
Somepalli, G., Singla, V., Goldblum, M., Geiping, J., and
Goldstein, T. Diffusion art or digital forgery? Investigat-
ing data replication in diffusion models. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 6048–6058, 2023.
Srivastava, A., Rastogi, A., Rao, A., Shoeb, A. A. M., Abid,
A., Fisch, A., Brown, A. R., Santoro, A., Gupta, A.,
Garriga-Alonso, A., Kluska, A., Lewkowycz, A., Agar-
wal, A., Power, A., Ray, A., Warstadt, A., Kocurek, A. W.,
Safaya, A., Tazarv, A., ..., and Wu, Z. Beyond the imita-
tion game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities
of language models. Transactions on Machine Learn-
ing Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=uyTL5Bvosj.
van der Wal, O., Bachmann, D., Leidinger, A., van Maanen,
L., Zuidema, W., and Schulz, K. Undesirable biases in
13

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
NLP: Addressing challenges of measurement. Journal
of Artificial Intelligence Research, 79:1–40, 2024. URL
https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.1.15195.
Wang, A., Barocas, S., Laird, K., and Wallach, H. Mea-
suring representational harms in image captioning. In
Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 324–335, 2022.
Wang, B., Chen, W., Pei, H., Xie, C., Kang, M., Zhang,
C., Xu, C., Xiong, Z., Dutta, R., Schaeffer, R.,
Truong, S., Arora, S., Mazeika, M., Hendrycks, D.,
Lin, Z., Cheng, Y., Koyejo, S., Song, D., and Li,
B. DecodingTrust: A comprehensive assessment
of trustworthiness in GPT models. In Proceed-
ings of the 36th Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 36, pp. 31232–31339,
2023a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
63cb9921eecf51bfad27a99b2c53dd6d-
Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.pdf.
Wang, X., Jiang, L., Hernandez-Orallo, J., Stillwell, D., Sun,
L., Luo, F., and Xie, X. Evaluating general-purpose AI
with psychometrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16379v2,
2023b.
Weidinger, L., Rauh, M., Marchal, N., Manzini, A., Hen-
dricks, L. A., Mateos-Garcia, J., Bergman, S., Kay, J.,
Griffin, C., Bariach, B., Gabriel, I., Rieser, V., and Isaac,
W. Sociotechnical safety evaluation of generative AI
systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11986, 2023.
Yu, J., Lin, X., Yu, Z., and Xing, X. GPTFuzzer: Red team-
ing large language models with auto-generated jailbreak
prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10253, 2023.
Zaller, J. The nature and origins of mass opinion. Cam-
bridge University Press, 1992.
Zhao, D., Andrews, J., Papakyriakopoulos, O., and Xiang,
A. Position: Measure dataset diversity, don’t just claim
it. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 235, pp. 60644–60673,
2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v235/zhao24a.html.
Zheng, L., Chiang, W.-L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z.,
Zhuang, Y., Lin, Z., Li, Z., Li, D., Xing, E., et al. Judging
LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and ChatBot Arena. In
Proceedings of the 36th Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pp. 46595–46623, 2023.
A. Terminology
A.1. Evaluating GenAI Systems
Object of interest: The GenAI system to be evaluated.
Concept of interest: The concept that is to be measured.
Usually related to the object of interest’s capabilities
(like its mathematical reasoning skills), behaviors (like
regurgitating pieces of its training data), or impacts (like
causing its users to feel harmed). Often abstract and
therefore cannot be directly measured. May have contested
meanings and understandings—across and within—use
cases, cultures, and languages (Mulligan et al., 2016; 2019).
Context of interest: The context in which the concept
of interest, as exhibited by the object of interest, is to
be measured. Examples include adversarial use and real-
world deployment contexts. Sometimes left unspecified.
Measurements: Quantities on nominal, ordinal, interval, or
ratio scales. Outputs of the measurement process. Each mea-
surement reflects the amount of the concept of interest, as
exhibited by the object of interest in the context of interest.
Measurement instruments: The operational procedures
and artifacts used to obtain the measurements. Examples
include datasets, classifiers, annotation guidelines, scoring
rubrics, and aggregation functions.
9 
Can be qualitative or
quantitative, but must collectively result in measurements.
Measurement approach: The approach that the measure-
ment instruments instantiate. Consists of a strategy—i.e.,
a high-level protocol for obtaining the measurements—and
a scope—i.e., the boundaries of what will and will not
be measured. Examples include benchmarking, auto-
mated red teaming, real-world evaluations, and user studies.
Measurement process: The systematic process by which
the measurements are obtained. Uses measurement
instruments that instantiate the measurement approach.
Evaluation process: The broader process of making and
justifying evaluative claims about the object of interest, of-
ten to inform decisions. Requires information about the ob-
ject of interest, often in the form of measurements of various
concepts of interest, as exhibited by that object in various
contexts of interest. Example evaluative claims include: the
object should or should not be used for a particular purpose,
the object should or should not be deployed in particular con-
texts, and the object should or should not be be redesigned.
A measurement therefore reflects the amount of a concept
of interest, as exhibited by an object of interest in a
context of interest. Measurements are obtained via the
9
We note that we take an expansive view of measurement
instruments. For example, we include functions that aggregate
the values of other measurement instruments to emphasize
that aggregation is an integral part of the measurement process.
14

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
measurement process using measurement instruments that
instantiate a measurement approach. Measurements are
one form of information used to make and justify evaluative
claims about an object of interest, often to inform decisions.
A.2. A Measurement Framework for GenAI
We use slightly different terminology to that of Adcock &
Collier (2001). However, the core ideas are very similar.
Background concept: The “broad constellation of mean-
ings and understandings associated with [the] concept [of
interest]” (Adcock & Collier, 2001). The meanings and un-
derstandings associated with the concept may be contested.
Systematized concept: The “specific formulation of
the concept[, which] commonly involves an explicit
definition” (Adcock & Collier, 2001). Very often omitted
or insufficiently precisely specified in the typical ML
approach to measurement. Distinguishing between the back-
ground concept and the systematized concept is crucial to
obtaining meaningful evidence when interrogating validity.
Constituent concepts: Concepts that are integral to the
concept of interest. Must be defined during systematization.
Measurement instruments: See above. In the context of
the framework described in Section 3, the measurement
instruments should operationalize the systematized concept.
Indicators: A set of variables that reflect observable phe-
nomena in the real world that are connected to the concept
of interest. Defined at the start of the operationalization
process. The values of the indicators are obtained and
aggregated using the measurement instruments. We note
that there is some terminological inconsistency in the social
science literature, with some researchers using the term
“indicators” to refer to the observable phenomena them-
selves, others using it to refer to the variables that represent
the observable phenomena, and others still (including
Adcock & Collier (2001)) appearing to use it to refer to
variables that represent the observable phenomena and
the instruments for obtaining and aggregating their values.
Measurements: See above.
Systematization: The process of narrowing the background
concept into the systematized concept. The foundation of
the measurement process. Very often conflated with oper-
ationalization in the typical ML approach to measurement.
Operationalization: The process of drawing on the system-
atized concept to develop the measurement instruments.
Application: The process of using the measurement instru-
ments to obtain measurements of the concept of interest.
Interrogation: The process of interrogating the validity of
the systematized concept, the measurement instruments, and
their resulting measurements. Very often omitted or insuffi-
ciently rigorous in the typical ML approach to measurement.
Lenses of validity: Collectively used to interrogate the
validity of the systematized concept, the measurement
instruments, and their resulting measurements. Each
lens—face validity, content validity, convergent validity,
discriminant validity, predictive validity, hypothesis validity,
and consequential validity—constitutes a different source
of evidence about validity, as we explain in Appendix B.
Conceptual debates: Debates about precisely what is
being measured and why—e.g., which meanings and under-
standings are reflected in the systematized concept? does it
reflect the meanings and understandings that different stake-
holders, all of whom may be interested in measuring the
concept for different reasons, want it to reflect? if not, why?
Conceptual debates encompass the systematization process
and the parts of the interrogation process that directly focus
on systematization and the systematized concept. As we
note below, in some cases, the other parts of the interroga-
tion process can also end up informing conceptual debates.
Operational debates: Debates about how the systematized
concept is measured—e.g., do the measurement instruments
yield valid measurements of the systematized concept? Op-
erational debates encompass the operationalization process
and the parts of the interrogation process that focus on opera-
tionalization, the measurement instruments, and their result-
ing measurements. In some cases, these parts of the inter-
rogation process can also shed light on conceptual debates.
B. Lenses of Validity
In this appendix, we explain the lenses of validity that we
recommend using (Jacobs & Wallach, 2021), highlighting
the roles each lens can play in conceptual and operational
debates. We note that our views differ from those of Adcock
& Collier (2001), who view the lenses of validity as only
informing operational debates, treating conceptual debates
as entirely separate. Instead, we argue that three lenses—
face validity, content validity, and convergent validity—are
especially useful for shedding light on conceptual de-
bates. The other lenses can also reveal systematization
issues even when used to interrogate the validity of the
measurement instruments and their resulting measurements.
Each lens constitutes a different source of evidence about
validity. We emphasize that determining what “sufficiently
valid” means is one of the most difficult aspects of interrogat-
ing validity, as there are no universal or definitive answers.
That said, the standard of evidence should be higher when
the measurements are to be used for high-stakes purposes.
Beyond this, as we discuss in Section 5, measurement instru-
ments and measurements should always be accompanied by
clear descriptions of the corresponding systematized con-
15

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
cepts, the various ways in which validity was interrogated,
and the resulting evidence for—and against—their validity.
Face validity: Face validity focuses on the extent to which
the systematized concept, in the case of conceptual debates,
and the measurement instruments and their resulting
measurements, in the case of operational debates, look rea-
sonable. Face validity is therefore inherently subjective and
must be supplemented with other, less subjective evidence.
Face validity can be interrogated by anyone, including the
people who systematized the concept, the people who devel-
oped the measurement instruments, the people who will use
the resulting measurements, any other people who might be
affected by the measurements, and any other stakeholders.
Content validity: In the case of conceptual debates, content
validity refers to the extent to which the systematized
concept reflects the most salient aspects of the background
concept, while in the case of operational debates, content
validity refers to the extent to which the measurement
instruments align with the substance and structure of
the systematized concept. Content validity therefore
has two facets: substantive validity and structural validity.
In the case of conceptual debates, substantive validity fo-
cuses on whether the systematized concept fully specifies
the observable phenomena that are connected to the concept.
In the case of operational debates, substantive validity fo-
cuses on whether the measurement instruments align with
those observable phenomena. In the case of conceptual
debates, structural validity focuses on whether the system-
atized concept fully specifies the relationships between the
observable phenomena and the concept and the relation-
ships among the observable phenomena. In the case of
operational debates, structural validity focuses on whether
the measurement instruments align with those relationships.
As with face validity, content validity can be interrogated
by anyone. However, because content validity has a much
deeper focus than face validity, it is often best interrogated
by stakeholders with specific expertise related to the concept
of interest (in the case of conceptual debates) or the mea-
surement instruments (in the case of operational debates).
We note that when interrogating content validity involves
familiarity with the specifics of particular GenAI systems or
reviewing code, it can be difficult for stakeholders who lack
sufficient technical expertise to be meaningfully involved.
Convergent validity: Convergent validity refers to
the extent to which the measurement instruments yield
measurements that are similar to measurements of the
concept, or other similar concepts, obtained using other,
already validated, measurement instruments. If the system-
atized concept is the same for both sets of measurement
instruments, then convergent validity can be used to inform
operational debates. If, however, the measurement instru-
ments use different systematized concepts (perhaps because
they are intended to measure different, albeit similar,
concepts) then it can be difficult to determine whether
dissimilar measurements are due to systematization issues,
operationalization issues, or both. As a result, convergent
validity can inform both conceptual and operational debates.
Discriminant validity: Discriminant validity refers to
the extent to which the measurement instruments yield
measurements that are dissimilar to measurements of
concepts that are dissimilar to the concept of interest (to the
extent to which we believe they are dissimilar), obtained
using already validated, instruments for measuring those
concepts. Because dissimilar concepts must necessarily
be systematized differently, it can be difficult to determine
whether inappropriately similar measurements are due
to systematization issues, operationalization issues, or
both. Therefore, like convergent validity, discriminant
validity can inform both conceptual and operational debates.
Hypothesis validity: Hypothesis validity focuses on the
extent to which the measurements can be used to confirm
hypotheses about the concept of interest that have already
been confirmed via other methods. If the measurements do
not confirm the hypotheses, this suggests systematization
issues, operationalization issues, or both. To try to rule
out systematization issues, it can be helpful to try to
confirm the hypotheses using measurements obtained using
other measurement instruments that operationalize the
same systematized concept. If those measurements con-
firm the hypotheses, this suggests operationalization issues.
Predictive validity: Predictive validity focuses on the ex-
tent to which the measurements can be used to predict
observable phenomena that are external to the concept of
interest—i.e., distinct from those specified as part of the
systematized concept—but known to be related to it in some
way. Like hypothesis validity, if the measurements cannot
successfully predict the external phenomena, this suggests
systematization issues, operationalization issues, or both.
Here too, it can therefore be helpful to try to predict the ex-
ternal phenomena using measurements obtained using other
measurement instruments that operationalize the same sys-
tematized concept to try to rule out systematization issues.
Consequential validity: Consequential validity is con-
cerned with the consequences of measurement,
10 
including
10
Consequential validity has a very different focus than the other
lenses of validity. It was first proposed by Messick (1987), who ar-
gued that the consequences of measurement instruments and their
resulting measurements should be fundamental to their validity.
Consequential validity is also related to “Goodhart’s Law” and
“Campbell’s Law” (Jacobs, 2021): Social scientists have long noted
that the validity of measurement instruments and their resulting
measurements can diminish over time as people focus on optimiz-
ing what is being measured, potentially also distorting the concepts
of interest, the objects of interest, and even the contexts of interest,
16

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
1) the consequences of the systematization, operational-
ization, application, and interrogation processes and 2) the
consequences of the systematized concept, the measurement
instruments, and the measurements themselves. By focusing
on the broader impacts of measurement—and especially
the societal, ethical, and cultural impacts—consequential
validity encompasses both intended and unintended conse-
quences. This makes it the widest-ranging lens of validity.
C. Framework Applicability
Below and in Figure 3, we illustrate the widespread
applicability of the framework described in Section 3 by
instantiating its levels with four very different measurement
tasks: 1) measuring the prevalence of text that stereotypes
social groups in the outputs of an already deployed LLM-
based chatbot; 2) measuring the mathematical reasoning
skills of a multimodal GenAI model; 3) measuring the extent
to which a widely used LLM memorizes pieces of its train-
ing data; and 4) measuring the extent to which a company’s
GenAI assistant refuses to comply with harmful prompts.
11
We emphasize that these examples are not intended to be
comprehensive. Rather, they are intended to illustrate how
the framework applies to very different measurement tasks.
Suppose we wish to measure the prevalence of text that
stereotypes social groups in the outputs of an already
deployed LLM-based chatbot. The background concept
encompasses all meanings and understandings of such text;
the systematized concept might be specific definitions of
“social groups” and “text that stereotypes social groups,”
as well as a particular set of linguistic patterns used by
researchers in social psychology, sociolinguistics, anthro-
pology, and other disciplines to define the presence of such
text; the measurement instruments might be a judge LLM, a
set of annotation guidelines that serve as prompt instructions
for the judge LLM, and functions for aggregating the judge
LLM’s annotations; and the resulting measurement would
then be the proportion of chatbot outputs that contain any
of the linguistic patterns. We use this measurement task
as a hypothetical running example throughout Section 4.
As another example, suppose we wish to measure the mathe-
matical reasoning skills of a multimodal GenAI model (e.g.,
He et al., 2024). The background concept encompasses all
meanings and understandings of mathematical reasoning
skills; the systematized concept might be the accuracy of
the model on highly challenging mathematical reasoning
problems aimed at pre-university students, spanning algebra,
as well as the purposes for which the measurements will be used.
11
We note that GenAI system inputs play different roles in these
measurement tasks. This is because some measurement approaches
treat inputs as measurement instruments (e.g., benchmarking
and automated red teaming), while others (e.g., measuring the
prevalence of some concept in real-world system outputs) do not.
number theory, combinatorics, and geometry; the measure-
ment instruments might be a particular set of International
Math Olympiad problems, the corresponding scoring rubric,
and a function for aggregating the per-problem scores into
an overall accuracy—collectively comprising a benchmark;
and the resulting measurement would then be the model’s
accuracy on the International Math Olympiad problems.
As a third example, suppose we wish to measure the extent
to which a widely used LLM memorizes pieces of its train-
ing data. The background concept encompasses all mean-
ings and understandings of memorization; the systematized
concept might connect memorization to observable phenom-
ena in the real world like regurgitation and extraction, jus-
tify the decision to focus on extraction, and provide specific
definitions of extraction and its constituent concepts; the
measurement instruments might be a particular set of pieces
of training data, each split into a prefix (to be used as an
input to the LLM) and a suffix (to be compared to the LLM’s
output for that prefix), a function for assessing whether a
single LLM output contains exact or near-exact copies of a
suffix, and an aggregation function for calculating the pro-
portion of outputs that contain exact or near-exact copies
of the suffixes; and the resulting measurement would then
be the proportion of outputs that contain exact or near-exact
copies of the suffixes when the LLM is prompted with the
prefixes. We discuss this measurement task in Appendix E.
Finally, suppose we wish to measure the extent to which a
company’s GenAI assistant refuses to comply with harm-
ful prompts. The background concept would be all mean-
ings and understandings of refusal to comply with harmful
prompts; the systematized concept might provide specific
definitions of “refusal to comply” (e.g., specifying whether
partial refusal is in scope, or only full refusal) and “harm-
ful prompts” (e.g., “prompts where compliance would vi-
olate the company’s terms of service”), as well as specify-
ing observable phenomena in the real world that are con-
nected to the concept of interest; the measurement instru-
ments might be a particular set of harmful prompts (e.g.,
selected to span all relevant aspects of the company’s terms
of service), a judge LLM, a set of annotation guidelines
that serve as prompt instructions for the judge LLM, and
a function for aggregating the judge LLM’s annotations
into an attack success rate;
12 
and the resulting measurement
would then be the attack success rate for the GenAI assistant.
D. Interrogation: Operationalization (Cont.)
In this appendix, we continue our discussion of interrogation
from Section 4.2.2, focusing specifically on discriminant
validity and hypothesis validity. Returning to the example
12
In keeping with the automated red-teaming literature, we fol-
low the convention of using attack success rates to measure refusal,
where a lower attack success rate means a higher refusal rate.
17

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
Figure 3. Instantiating the levels in the framework described in Section 3 with four very different measurement tasks.
of measuring the prevalence of text that stereotypes social
groups in the outputs of an already deployed LLM-based
chatbot, interrogating discriminant validity would involve
comparing measurements obtained using our judge LLM
to measurements of dissimilar concepts, such as hostile
text or text with negative sentiment, obtained using other,
already validated instruments for measuring those concepts.
Although neither concept is completely unrelated to text that
stereotypes social groups, it is important to check that our
measurements only reflect them to the extent to which we
believe they are similar to text that stereotypes social groups.
Hypothesis validity focuses on the extent to which the mea-
surements can be used to confirm hypotheses about the con-
cept of interest that have already been confirmed via other
methods. For example, we might check that inputs designed
to elicit text that stereotypes social groups (and confirmed
via other methods) result in chatbot outputs that contain a
higher prevalence of such text according to our judge LLM.
E. Case Study: Memorization
In this appendix, we present a case study that shows how the
framework described in Section 3 brings clarity to ongoing
debates about the extent to which GenAI models encode
exact or near-exact copies of pieces of their training data
in their parameters—a concept known as memorization.
E.1. Systematization
Memorization raises serious privacy and copyright con-
cerns, and therefore lies at the center of several ongoing
debates (Lee et al., 2025). However, it is an inherent
attribute of a GenAI model that is very difficult to directly
measure, especially without access to model internals.
As a result, ML researchers and practitioners typically
focus on measuring extraction (e.g., Carlini et al., 2023b;
Nasr et al., 2025; Prashanth et al., 2025)—i.e., when
a user intentionally and successfully prompts a GenAI
model (sometimes as a component of a GenAI system) to
generate such an output—or regurgitation (e.g., Aerni et al.,
2025)—i.e., when a GenAI model (also sometimes as a
component of a GenAI system) generates an output that
contains an exact or near-exact copy of a piece of training
data. Despite important differences between these concepts,
they are often conflated, which has led to considerable
conceptual confusion (Cooper & Grimmelmann, 2025).
18

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
Using the framework described in Section 3 would likely
mitigate much of this confusion. As a background concept,
memorization is inclusive of a broad range of meanings and
understandings. For example, what counts as a “piece of
training data?” A literal data point that was used during the
training process? A portion of such a data point? Multiple
such data points? As another example, how should “exact
and “near-exact” be defined? The answer to this question de-
pends on the modality of the model outputs: For text, should
we consider alternative spellings of a word? Slight changes
in punctuation? What about translations? For images,
should we focus on pixel differences? Semantic differences?
Vector distances (Carlini et al., 2023a; Somepalli et al.,
2023)? Providing specific definitions for these constituent
concepts would help considerably, as would specifying
how memorization is connected to observable phenomena
in the real world like regurgitation and extraction and
justifying the decision to focus on one over the other based
on the purpose for which the measurements will be used.
For example, if we are interested in making claims about
typical use, then regurgitation is likely more appropriate.
If we are instead interested in making claims about
adversarial use, then extraction is likely more appropriate.
Ultimately, systematizing memorization involves many
decisions, each influencing the resulting measurements.
Explicitly foregrounding and interrogating these deci-
sions would likely bring greater clarity to ongoing debates.
E.1.1. INTERROGATION: SYSTEMATIZATION
Interrogating content validity makes it clear that although
generating an output that contains an exact or near-exact
copy of a piece of training data is strong evidence that the
piece of training data was memorized by a GenAI model,
any measurement of regurgitation or extraction is likely an
underestimate of memorization (Lee et al., 2022; Carlini
et al., 2021; Nasr et al., 2025; Carlini et al., 2023b). This
is because the model may have memorized other pieces
of training data that do not appear in its outputs. This then
raises the question of what matters most to the evaluative
claims we wish to make, touching on consequential validity.
Do we only care whether a GenAI model generates exact
or near-exact copies of pieces of training data? Or do
we care whether it encodes exact or near-exact copies of
pieces of its training data in its parameters, regardless of
whether those pieces of training data are ever generated?
These questions matter a great deal to ongoing privacy
and copyright debates about memorization. For example,
encoding exact or near-exact copies of pieces of training
data in GenAI models’ parameters is central to privacy and
copyright debates about the nature of such models. For
example, should GenAI models be considered personal
or private data if they memorize such data (Nolte et al.,
2025; Cooper et al., 2024)? Are GenAI models copies, in
a copyright-technical sense, of the pieces of training data
they have memorized (Cooper & Grimmelmann, 2025)?
E.2. Operationalization
Developing instruments for measuring memorization
similarly involves many decisions. Focusing specifically
on LLMs for concreteness, what if we do not have access to
an LLM’s training data? How might we develop a proxy for
it? Exactly how many tokens best meets our definition of
“a piece of training data”? 10? At least 32? 50? If we have
chosen to focus on extraction, what prompting methodology
should we use? One common approach, called discoverable
extraction, involves sampling 2k-token pieces from an
LLM’s training data (or a proxy for it). Each piece is split
into a k-token prefix and a k-token suffix. The prefixes are
used as inputs to the LLM, while each suffix is compared
to the LLM’s output for the corresponding prefix, usually
obtained using deterministic, greedy sampling (Carlini et al.,
2021; 2023b; Nasr et al., 2025). This approach is relatively
inexpensive, but its use of deterministic, greedy sampling,
rather than non-deterministic, non-greedy sampling, which
is more common when using LLMs in practice, may result
in unrealistic measurements. Another approach takes a prob-
abilistic perspective, sampling each prefix multiple times to
approximate the probability of generating that prefix’s suffix
using non-deterministic, non-greedy sampling (Hayes et al.,
2025). For either approach, which pieces of training data
should we use? Which function best meets our definition of
“exact” and “near-exact”? Each of these decisions influences
the resulting measurements—often significantly—so fore-
grounding and interrogating them is especially important.
E.2.1. INTERROGATION: OPERATIONALIZATION
We emphasize that several key findings from prior work
on memorization can be reinterpreted using the lenses of
validity. First, again focusing specifically on LLMs for con-
creteness, when deciding how many tokens of training data
to use, it is important to use enough tokens to ensure that the
resulting measurements genuinely reflect pieces of training
data that have been encoded in an LLM’s parameters, as
opposed to happenstance generation (Carlini et al., 2021;
Nasr et al., 2025). Interrogating face validity has led to the
general consensus that 10 tokens is too short to confidently
rule out happenstance, with 50 tokens now accepted as
the norm (Nasr et al., 2025). Similarly, many pieces of
data (regardless of whether they are pieces of training data)
could, theoretically, be generated by happenstance, given
enough attempts. Recent work on probabilistic discoverable
extraction has therefore interrogated discriminant validity
by comparing measurements of extraction to measurements
of the rate of generating exact or near-exact copies of pieces
of unseen test data that, by definition, could not have been
memorized (and therefore cannot be extracted) (Hayes et al.,
19

Position: Evaluating Generative AI Systems Is a Social Science Measurement Challenge
2025). Finally, also focusing on probabilistic discoverable
extraction, recent work has interrogated convergent validity
by assessing whether measurements of extraction are
correlated with the corresponding suffixes’ perplexi-
ties, as expected, finding that they are (Hayes et al., 2025).
20
