
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2606.10417

Beyond Coverage and Kill Scores: Empirically
Measuring Test Suite Behavioural Gaps
Partha Protim Paul and Reid Holmes
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
{pppaul, rtholmes}@cs.ubc.ca
Abstract—Traditional test adequacy metrics measure a sys-
tem’s implementation, not whether it adheres to its expected
behaviour. While developers rely heavily on code coverage and
mutation testing to assess test suite quality, these metrics are
fundamentally implementation-centric and cannot detect gaps
between what the code is expected to do and what it actually
does. Unfortunately, there has been no way to reliably detect these
discrepancies; in this paper we introduce an automated proof-
of-concept approach to investigate these gaps. The approach
extracts expected method-level behaviours from natural language
documentation and source code, maps them to existing test cases,
and identifies gaps between expected and validated behaviours.
We evaluate the approach across ten popular open-source Java
libraries comprising 8,922 methods, extracting 20,729 behaviours
with 93.1% precision. Our empirical analysis conservatively
estimates that 17.5% of detected expected behaviours remain
entirely untested, which we term as the test suite’s behavioural
gap. To determine if these gaps are merely an artifact of
human-driven testing, we evaluate state-of-the-art automated test
generators (EVOSUITE / ASTER), finding that they similarly
fail to validate at least 20.6% / 27.1% of detected expected
behaviours. We further demonstrate that behavioural gaps are
not predicted by traditional structural metrics: the majority
of untested behaviours occur in methods that already have
high line coverage, and over half persist in methods with high
mutation kill score. These results suggest behavioural coverage
acts as an independent dimension of test suite adequacy that can
complement traditional structural metrics.
Index Terms—Behavioural Gaps, Coverage, Mutation Testing
I. INTRODUCTION
Early testing approaches directed validation effort on ex-
pected program behaviour [1], [2], in contrast to the current
more common approaches that examine implementation struc-
ture [3]. In practice, expected behaviours are often expressed
through informal documentation, edge cases, and API con-
tracts, making behavioural completeness difficult to evaluate
systematically [4], [5]. As a result, software testing research
and practice have largely converged on implementation-centric
structural proxies for test quality [6], [7], [8], with code
coverage and mutation kill scores commonly being used to
evaluate how complete a test suite is [9], [10], [11].
Unfortunately, structural test measures have introduced
shortcomings that decouple test metrics from true behavioural
intent. As these metrics validate correctness relative to the
existing implementation, they are inherently blind to faults
of omission: missing logic or unhandled requirements can
still yield high structural scores [12], [13]. These metrics
also focus on code execution rather than behavioural val-
idation; a test suite can maximize coverage or kill scores
while lacking the robust oracles needed to validate expected
behaviours, not just directly measuring the code as it was
implemented [14], [15]. For instance, as we show in Section II,
a test achieving 100% coverage can still leave an entire
documented behaviour untested, leaving any regression against
it undetected. Early software engineering theory warned that
structural execution cannot guarantee that a program fulfills
its expected behaviours [16], [17], [18]; modern empirical
evaluations confirm that actively optimizing for these code-
centric thresholds yields highly optimized test suites with
degraded fault-detection capabilities [19], [20].
The primary advantage of structural measures is that they
are easy to collect as they map directly to the source
code, which is amenable to automated analyses. This con-
trasts with expected behaviours, which are often encoded
within natural language documentation, providing an abstract,
implementation-independent description of what a method
should do [4], and are not currently directly measurable like
coverage and kill scores. While measuring whether a test suite
validates documented behaviours has remained challenging
because it requires linking natural language documentation to
the behaviours evaluated by test cases [21], recent advances in
large language models (LLMs) now make this form of analysis
feasible [22]. This paper therefore examines: To what ex-
tent can documentation-derived expected behaviours augment
structural metrics in revealing inadequacies in existing test
suites? We investigate this question empirically through four
research questions around measuring behavioural coverage in
software testing.
RQ1 (Feasibility): With what precision can expected
behaviours be extracted from source code and documenta-
tion? Before we can evaluate test adequacy, we must first de-
termine if expected method-level behaviours can be extracted
from natural language and code with sufficient precision for
large-scale analysis. To this end, we introduce BFINDER,
a proof-of-concept that extracts expected behaviours, maps
them to corresponding test cases, and identifies untested be-
haviours. Across ten popular open-source projects containing
8,922 documented methods, BFINDER surfaces 20,729 distinct
behaviours with a validated precision of 93.1%.
RQ2 (Prevalence): To what extent do mature, developer-
written test suites exhibit behavioural gaps? To understand
the prevalence of behavioural gaps in real-world systems, we
analyze the test suites of the same ten projects. We define
arXiv:2606.10417v1 [cs.SE] 9 Jun 2026

a behavioural gap as a documented behaviour that is not
validated by any existing test case. Our analysis conservatively
finds that at least 17.5% of detected expected behaviours are
not covered by these existing, well-maintained test suites. Fur-
thermore, a qualitative inspection of these gaps indicates that
these behaviours are rarely inherently untestable, suggesting a
systematic shortfall in current validation practices.
RQ3 (Generalization): Do behavioural gaps persist when
test suites are automatically generated? To determine
whether behavioural gaps are inherent to manual test authoring
or a systemic limitation of structure-guided testing practices,
we evaluate whether they persist in automatically generated
test suites. We apply two state-of-the-art test generation ap-
proaches, EVOSUITE [23] and ASTER [24], to four of our
subject systems. We find that 27.1% of behaviours are missed
by ASTER and 20.6% by EVOSUITE. These results suggest
that behavioural gaps are not just an artifact of human-
written code, but a fundamental challenge for both human and
automated testing strategies.
RQ4 (Implication): Do behavioural gaps alias traditional
structural metrics? We hypothesize that behavioural gaps are
not simply proxies for low coverage or mutation scores, but
represent a distinct dimension of test adequacy. Across the
untested behaviours identified in our developer-written suites,
we find that the majority of untested behaviours occur in
methods that already achieve high structural scores. Most fall
in methods exceeding 90% line coverage, and over half in
methods exceeding 90% mutation kill scores. These findings
indicate that behavioural gaps can identify validation weak-
nesses in code that is ‘comprehensively’ tested, suggesting
that behavioural gaps can complement analysis of structurally-
strong suites.
This paper makes the following key contributions:
• Empirical Analysis of Behavioural Gaps: We conduct
an empirical study across ten popular open-source Java
libraries, demonstrating that significant behavioural gaps
exist between the documented and validated behaviours
of real-world methods, even in suites with high structural
coverage.
• Generalization to Automated Testing: We present a
direct comparison against two state-of-the-art automated
test generation approaches, confirming that these be-
havioural gaps persist even in fully-generated test suites.
• Behavioural Coverage as a Distinct Dimension: We
show that behavioural gaps do not alias line coverage or
mutation kill score. Gaps persist in 38.2% of methods
with perfect line coverage and 29.6% with a perfect
mutation kill score, establishing behavioural coverage as
a complementary dimension of test adequacy.
• Tool & Artifacts: We provide a publicly available repli-
cation package, including BFINDER and all identified
behavioural gaps, to enable researchers to reproduce
our results and extend this analysis to other software
systems.
1
1 
BFINDER: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/behavioural-coverage
Section II provides a motivating example showing how be-
haviours are missed, despite being covered. Section III de-
scribes related work. BFINDER is introduced in Section IV.
Section V describes empirical study and its findings. Sec-
tion VI concludes.
II. MOTIVATING EXAMPLE
The Triple.emptyArray() method from the
commons-lang library is shown at the top of Figure 1.
From the documentation, a developer would expect the
method to provide two main behaviours: First, the description
and the method name itself make it clear that the method
should return an empty array. Second, the @return block
reinforces that the method should always return the same
array instance, since it is defined as a singleton.
1 /** Returns the empty array singleton that can
2 
* be
 assigned without compiler warning.
3 
*
4 
* @param
 <L> the left element type.
5 
* @param
 <M> the middle element type.
6 
* @param
 <R> the right element type.
7 
* @return
 the empty array singleton that can
8 
* 
be assigned without compiler warning.
9 
* @since
 3.10
10 
*/
11 public static Triple<L, M, R>[] emptyArray() {
12 return (Triple<L, M, R>[]) EMPTY_ARRAY;
13 }
14
15 // Only developer-written test for emptyArray
16 @Test
17 void testEmptyArrayGenerics() {
18 Triple<Integer, String, Boolean>[] empty =
19 Triple.emptyArray();
20 assertEquals(0, empty.length);
21 }
Fig. 1: Documentation, implementation, and developer-written
test for emptyArray() from the commons-lang project.
The only developer-written test case for emptyArray is
shown at the bottom of Figure 1. While this test case achieves
100% coverage for the emptyArray implementation, it only
validates the first expected behaviour: that the returned array is
actually empty. The existing test suite exhibits a gap between
the expected behaviours and existing suite: the suite fails to
validate that the returned array is a singleton. As a result, if a
regression were introduced that changed the method to return
a new empty array each time, this change would go undetected
and could introduce new faults to users of emptyArray()
who relied on the method returning a singleton instance of the
empty array.
This paper seeks to address the gap between the source
code and test case above. While the developer-written test
suite appears to be relatively complete from a coverage point-
of-view, the test cases do not actually validate all of the
behaviours a developer using this method might expect they
could rely upon. Our approach, called BFINDER, takes as input
the source code and documentation for a method, along with
its existing test suite, and identifies these behavioural gaps

between existing tests and expected behaviours. These gaps
are actionable: developers can resolve them by strengthening
their test suite to directly address the specifically-identified
weakness in their existing tests. This gap can be easily
addressed by a single assertSame(..) assertion across
two invocations to validate that the returned array is the same
instance for multiple calls.
The remainder of this paper describes an approach for
detecting behavioural gaps, evaluates the accuracy of this
technique, and describes the kinds of behaviours that are
frequently missed by existing developer-written test suites.
III. RELATED WORK
Prior work has studied test suite completeness through
structural metrics and code-centric gap analysis, and has used
documentation to guide test generation. However, whether a
semantic gap exists between the behaviours the developer doc-
umented and the behaviours their test suites actually validate
has not been studied. In the following subsections, we discuss
how each of these areas provides context to our study.
A. Structural Test Measures
Code coverage and mutation kill score are the two most
widely adopted proxies for test suite quality in both research
and practice [9], [10], [11]. Coverage measures whether
source lines are executed by tests, while mutation kill score
assesses whether those executions are backed by meaning-
ful assertions [25]. Mutation kill score has been shown to
correlate significantly with real fault detection independently
of coverage, making it the best available proxy for test
suite effectiveness [11]. Together, they are often treated as
complementary signals of test suite completeness. However,
other studies have shown that coverage correlates only weakly
with fault detection once test suite size is controlled for [19],
and mutation testing incurs significant computational cost that
limits its scalability in practice. Fundamentally, both metrics
are implementation-centric, measuring properties of the code
as written rather than whether the code fulfills its documented
behaviours.
B. Complementing Structural Testing
Several prior projects have studied the notion of testing gap
from a code-centric perspective. They have mainly focused on
situations where tests execute code but fail to meaningfully
check its behaviour. Schuler et al.’s checked-coverage tech-
nique identifies code whose effects are not validated by the
assertions in the tests [26]. Similarly, mutation-testing research
has explored pseudo-tested methods, where mutants can be
introduced without causing test failures, indicating weak or
ineffective tests [27]. More recently, Maton et al. introduced
GAPGREP, which connects checked coverage and mutation
testing to identify execution gaps in test suites [28].
These approaches provide insight into whether the exe-
cuted code is meaningfully asserted. However, they remain
fundamentally code-centric and do not consider whether tests
validate the behaviours developers explicitly describe in doc-
umentation. Fraser et al. recognized this limitation early,
proposing behavioural adequacy as a criterion grounded in
whether test executions can reproduce an accurate model of
system behaviour [5]. Despite this early recognition, to the
best of our knowledge, no work has characterized how large
this gap is between documented intent and what existing
developer-written test suites actually validate. We address this
gap empirically, using LLMs as a measurement instrument
rather than a generation engine, to quantify the lower bound
on how much of the documented intent of real-world Java
libraries goes unvalidated in practice.
C. Automated Test Generation
Automated test generation tools target structural coverage
through various strategies: search-based approaches (e.g., Evo-
Suite [23]), symbolic execution [29], constraint solving [30],
fuzzing [31], [32], and LLM-based methods such as ChatU-
niTest [33] and ASTER [24].
Some tools use method documentation to guide test gen-
eration. Toradocu extracts exception-related conditions from
structured Javadoc tags to generate executable oracles [34].
JDoctor extends this approach to infer pre- and post-conditions
from @param, @return, and @throws tags [35], while Ju-
dot uses these inferred contracts to guide search-based test
generation [36]. However, JDoctor’s reliance on structured
tags limits its reach to methods with formal documentation,
leaving behaviours expressed in narrative text outside its scope.
DISTINCT uses LLMs to generate tests by using natural
language descriptions and branch-level coverage analysis [37].
More recently, LLMs have been applied to tasks that
bridge natural language and code. Endres et al. [22] showed
that Javadoc can be translated into executable postcondi-
tions, and tools like DocPrism [38] use LLMs to detect
code-documentation inconsistencies. DocPrism showed that
although documentation is sometimes viewed as unreliable,
documentation errors are relatively infrequent (∼10%) and
are typically detectable [38], suggesting documentation can
be relied upon in practice.
Despite this progress, these tools treat documentation as a
blueprint for creating new tests or oracles from scratch, but do
not evaluate whether the existing developer-written test suite
already covers the documented behaviours. As a result, even
with documentation-aware generation, the extent to which
existing test suites fail to validate their own documented
intent remains an open empirical question. In this paper
we empirically measure behavioural gaps in both developer-
written test suites and in suites created by automated test
generation approaches.
IV. BFINDER: DETECTING UNTESTED BEHAVIOURS
We built the BFINDER proof-of-concept to investigate the
prevalence of behavioural gaps in real-world Java systems. The
high-level process BFINDER follows is shown in Figure 2.
First, the approach creates per-method call graphs to link

Behaviour Extraction
Identify method
behaviours
Documented
method
Expected
behaviours
Behaviour Mapping
Map behaviours to test
cases
Untested
behaviours
Test Case Identification
Statically identify
test classes
System test
classes
Static and/or dynamic
call graph construction
Per-method
call graphs
b
a
c
System source
& test code
Fig. 2: Process BFINDER follows to identify any untested behaviours for a given documented method and the system’s existing
developer-written test suite.
source methods to the test cases that validate them. Sec-
ond, the behaviour extractor uses an LLM-based approach to
identify the expected behaviours for any documented method.
Finally, the method’s expected behaviours are mapped to the
behaviours validated by the method’s test cases to determine
which behaviours remain untested by the existing test suite.
BFINDER works on Java (v8+) systems using the JUnit test
library (v4+). BFINDER is available in the replication package.
A. Test Case Identification (Figure 2(a))
To determine which behaviours of a method are vali-
dated by the test suite, BFINDER first identifies the set
of test cases that invoke each method under test. The ap-
proach statically scans the repository for JUnit @Test and
@ParameterizedTest annotations to enumerate all test
classes, then constructs a full-system call graph capturing how
each test case interacts with the methods under test.
By default, BFINDER uses dynamic analysis: each test class
is executed in isolation using an AspectJ
2
-based monitoring
agent that records every method entry and exit. Dynamic
analysis is preferred because it captures exact runtime ex-
ecution paths, avoiding the over- and under-approximation
inherent in static analysis. The cost of this dynamic analysis
is approximately 2x the test execution time compared to an
uninstrumented test suite.
Because the per-class call graph contains detail irrelevant to
any individual method under test, BFINDER prunes the graph
into a dedicated call graph per method. A breadth-first traversal
finds all paths that eventually invoke the target method; the
surviving nodes are then statically enriched with each method’s
implementation, Javadoc, and referenced class-level variables.
The result is one enriched entry method under test, which
serves as the primary input to the behaviour mapping step
(Section IV-C).
BFINDER also supports several specializations for flexi-
ble use and increased performance. Analysis scope can be
narrowed from the full system to a single directory, class,
or method, substantially reducing runtime. For systems with
straightforward test suites, static call-graph tracing can replace
2
AspectJ: https://github.com/eclipse-aspectj/aspectj
dynamic instrumentation entirely resulting in negligible test
case identification overhead. Finally, BFINDER integrates nat-
urally into CI/CD pipelines: given a diff, it can update call-
graph knowledge for only the affected source and test methods
rather than recomputing all test-to-code links from scratch.
B. Extracting Behaviours (Figure 2(b))
BFINDER generates a list of expected behaviours for every
source method in the system that is accompanied by a method-
level Javadoc comment. Our proof-of-concept focuses on
documented methods because developers use documentation
as a flexible way to surface a method’s expected behaviours
without inspecting its implementation [4]. For each such
method, BFINDER invokes an LLM with some guidance, the
method signature, implementation, and Javadoc. The output of
this is a list of expected behaviours (denoted EB
1
, EB
2
, . . . ).
Each expected behaviour is typically expressed as a single
sentence and describes a property or guarantee a developer
would reasonably expect from the method based on its doc-
umentation. These behaviours form the reference set against
which test cases that validate the method are evaluated. For
the code given in Figure 1, BFINDER returns two expected
behaviours: “Returns an empty array with no elements“, and
“Returns the same singleton array instance every time.”
LLMs are well-suited to behaviour extraction because they
can interpret unstructured natural language and summarize it
into discrete, testable behaviours [39]. This has been lever-
aged by prior approaches; for example, JDoctor [35] and
Toradocu [34] extract formal contracts only from structured
Javadoc tags (@param, @return, @throws). In this work,
we focus on the entire Javadoc block, including any narrative
text the developer thought would be important for understand-
ing a method. Our goal in this phase is to surface the set of
behaviours a developer might reasonably expect based on the
full documentation of a method, rather than to infer formal
contracts.
C. Behaviour Mapping (Figure 2(c))
Once the method’s expected behaviours and relevant test
cases are known, BFINDER determines which of the expected
behaviours are not validated by the existing test cases. This

phase establishes a traceability link between a method’s natural
language documentation and concrete test cases that validate
its behaviour.
For each relevant test case, BFINDER uses an LLM to
determine which expected behaviour(s) the test case val-
idates. The model is provided with a set of goals, the
method under test and its documentation, the test case method
being evaluated, the list of expected behaviours (EB =
{EB
1
, EB
2
, . . . , EB
n
}), and the relevant nodes in the call
graph between the method under test and the test case.
Including the call graph allows the model to consider indirect
interactions between the test case and the method under
test. This step produces a set of tested behaviours, denoted
T B = {T B
1
, T B
2
, · · · , T B
n
} (by construction, T B ⊆ EB),
where each element corresponds to an expected behaviour that
is validated by the test case.
Finally, BFINDER emits the set of untested behaviours as
U T B = EB − T B. These untested behaviours (UTB) repre-
sent gaps between the behaviours derived from the method’s
documentation and the behaviours validated by the existing
test suite. The average processing time was ≈3–4 minutes per
method, including both behaviour extraction and test mapping.
On local inference, the primary bottleneck was LLM response
latency, accounting for nearly 2–3 minutes for a method
with 7–8 associated tests. Token usage averaged 6K–8K per
method under test, scaling with the number of associated test
cases. This relatively small token burden can be processed by
commercial LLM services in < 10 seconds per method.
V. EVALUATION
Unit test suites strive to comprehensively validate that the
code under test behaves as expected. Structural metrics such as
line coverage and mutation kill score are widely used to assess
this, but they do not capture whether all expected behaviours
are actually validated. In this section, we investigate whether
gaps exist between the behaviours developers document and
the behaviours their test suites validate.
Specifically, our evaluation seeks to answer the following
research questions:
• RQ1 (Feasibility): With what precision can expected
behaviours be extracted from source code and docu-
mentation? Before studying behavioural gaps, we must
establish whether automatically-extracted behaviours are
meaningful and grounded in the documented intent of
each method. This RQ evaluates the quality of behaviour
extraction as a precondition for the remaining research
questions.
• RQ2 (Prevalence): Do developer-written test suites
exhibit behavioural gaps in practice? This RQ inves-
tigates whether behavioural gaps exist in practice, how
large they are, and what kinds of behaviours developers
commonly overlook in their test suites.
• RQ3 (Generalization): To what extent are auto-
matically-generated test suites prone to behavioural
gaps? This RQ determines whether automatically-
generated suites also exhibit behavioural gaps to deter-
mine whether these gaps are inherent to manual test
writing practice.
• RQ4 (Implication): Do behavioural gaps alias tradi-
tional structural metrics? This RQ examines whether
behavioural gaps are captured by existing structural met-
rics such as line coverage and mutation kill score, or
whether they represent a complementary dimension of
test suite adequacy.
Experimental design decisions all have benefits and draw-
backs. Following best-practice advice [40], we report the ex-
perimental design decisions and their implications along with
our experimental methodology rather than a separate threats
to validity section. The full replication package, including all
identified untested behaviours is publicly available.
3
LLM Configuration. All experiments were conducted using
the Qwen3-14B model [41], executed locally on a single
NVIDIA A100 80GB GPU with recommended settings (Tem-
perature=0.6, TopP=0.95, TopK=20, and MinP=0).
4
Project Selection Evaluated projects were selected from De-
fects4J [42], a widely used benchmark in software testing
research. We applied a systematic filtering process to ensure
technical consistency and reproducibility. We retained only
projects that: (1) contain a pom.xml file in the root direc-
tory, ensuring Maven-based builds; (2) are not part of the
libraries used in our BFINDER infrastructure; (3) are hosted
as monorepos, meaning each repository contains only the
library’s code rather than a collection of different libraries;
and (4) use JUnit version 4 or higher. Applying these criteria
yielded ten projects. We analyzed all public and protected
3 
BFINDER: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/behavioural-coverage
4
https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-14B\#best-practices
TABLE I: Dataset used from Defects4J along with their key properties and details of their developer-written test suites.
Project (Version) # Source Methods # Test Methods SLOC Line Cov. Mutation Kill Score
commons-cli (1.10.0-SNAPSHOT) 214 461 1965 98.2% 93%
commons-codec (1.21.1-SNAPSHOT) 523 1,196 4972 94.9% 92%
commons-compress (1.29.0-SNAPSHOT) 997 2,254 25308 88.0% 82%
commons-jxpath (1.4.1-SNAPSHOT) 98 367 9,228 77.7% 75%
commons-collections (4.5.1-SNAPSHOT) 1,352 1,901 14751 85.9% 87%
commons-lang (3.18.0-SNAPSHOT) 2,703 4,483 16,133 96.5% 88%
commons-csv (1.14.2-SNAPSHOT) 175 511 1,225 99.6% 95%
gson (2.13.3-SNAPSHOT) 244 1,395 5,253 92.2% 91%
jfreechart (2.0.0-SNAPSHOT) 2,068 2,299 51,346 56.5% 59%
jsoup (1.21.1) 548 1,442 9,778 89.6% 79%

documented methods that were executed by at least one test
case. A summary of the selected projects is shown in Table I.
Coverage was collected with JaCoCo [43]; mutation kill
scores were collected using PIT [44]. Most projects have high
coverage and kill scores. Eight of ten projects exceed 80%
line coverage; seven projects exceed 80% mutation kill score.
Implication: These projects enable studying whether be-
havioural gaps exist in popular, long-lived projects that have
invested significant testing effort. By investigating behavioural
gaps in comprehensively-tested projects, we hope our findings
represent a lower bound for missed behaviour. The project
selection methodology limits our analysis to one broad class
of project (libraries) and one programming language (Java).
Evaluating the approach on other languages and domains
remains for future work.
A. RQ1 (Feasibility): With what precision can expected be-
haviours be extracted from source code and documentation?
Before quantifying behavioural gaps, we must ensure that
the behaviours the BFINDER proof-of-concept surfaces are
valid. To this end, we first investigate the precision of the
BFINDER behaviour extraction (Figure 2(b)). BFINDER iden-
tified 20,729 behaviours across all documented methods in
our dataset. To evaluate whether these behaviours are correct,
we adopt a two-step approach: we first establish human
consensus labels to determine how consistently behaviours can
be labelled from documentation and source code. We next
build an LLM-based judge, compare its labelling performance
against the prior human labels, and apply this judge against
all identified behaviours to assess the overall precision of
BFINDER.
Behaviour assessment judge: The judge is an agentic system
built on the Ministral 3:14B reasoning model with its default
configuration. We use a different model family (Ministral) as
the judge from the one used for behaviour extraction (Qwen)
to mitigate self-enhancement bias [45]. We choose this model
for its strong reasoning performance relative to similar-sized
models, which is important for behaviour validation [46].
Substituting the model with a more advanced reasoning model
should only increase the judge’s precision.
The judge is provided a method behaviour, the method’s
documentation and implementation, and can query other
method implementations as needed via tool use. The judge
then assesses whether the provided behaviour would be ex-
pected. Across all projects, the judge labelled 19,829 (95.7%)
behaviours as valid and 900 (4.3%) as invalid. Table II reports
the judge’s output alongside BFINDER’s extracted counts.
Validating behaviour judge against human labels: Recent
work has shown that LLMs can effectively label software
engineering tasks when properly validated [47], [48], [49].
We follow this practice and validate our judge through manual
labelling before trusting it at scale. As the judge’s predictions
are imbalanced (19,829 valid vs. 900 invalid), a proportional
random sample would over-sample valid judgments. We there-
fore used a disproportional stratified random sample [50]
of 100 behaviours, taking 50 from each stratum (valid and
invalid) to ensure the minority class is sufficiently represented.
Within each stratum, we further distribute samples evenly
across the 10 projects.
Two authors, each with several years of Java experience,
independently labelled each of the 100 behaviours as valid or
invalid based on the method and its documentation. The two
labellers reached substantial agreement (Cohen’s κ = 0.77,
Krippendorff’s α = 0.79) [51]. A post-hoc power analysis
(α = 0.05, power=0.90) indicates that 43 samples are suffi-
cient to detect this level of agreement [52], well within our
sample of 100. The labellers resolved any disagreements col-
laboratively to produce a consensus label for each behaviour
to serve as a ground truth against which to evaluate the judge.
Comparing the judge’s original prediction to these con-
sensus labels yields κ = 0.68 and α = 0.68, again repre-
senting substantial agreement. The post-hoc power analysis
(α = 0.05, power=0.90) indicates that a minimum of 89
samples are required to detect this level of agreement.
TABLE II: BFINDER extracted behaviours and judged validity.
Project # Behaviours # Valid # Invalid (%)
commons-cli 424 402 22 (5%)
commons-codec 1,218 1,158 60 (5%)
commons-compress 1,707 1,614 93 (5%)
commons-jxpath 183 177 6 (3%)
commons-collections 2,816 2,681 135 (5%)
commons-lang 7,719 7,380 339 (4%)
commons-csv 361 348 13 (3%)
gson 554 536 18 (3%)
jfreechart 4,532 4,366 166 (4%)
jsoup 1,215 1,167 48 (4%)
Total 20,729 19,829 900 (4%)
Estimating precision over all extracted behaviours: Since
the judge serves as our measurement instrument over all be-
haviours (AB = 20, 729), its precision directly determines our
confidence in BFINDER’s extracted behaviours. Recall cannot
be calculated because expected behaviours lack a discrete
ground truth; their decomposition into individual behaviours
is inherently subjective. We therefore evaluate precision, as
determining whether an extracted behaviour is valid constitutes
a well-defined binary judgment. A high precision implies that
when BFINDER identifies a behaviour, we can be confident it
is valid and expected given a method and its documentation.
We use the consensus labels from the 100 samples to
estimate per-stratum validity rates. Among the 50 samples
drawn from the judge’s valid stratum, 48 are confirmed valid
compared to the human labels (ˆp
valid 
= 0.96). Among
the 50 samples from the invalid stratum, 14 are confirmed
valid (ˆp
invalid 
= 0.28). This reflects the judge’s conservative
tendency to flag some valid behaviours as invalid.
Specifically, the judge tended to reject behaviours that were
implied rather than explicitly stated in the documentation. For
example, flagging a behaviour about negative inputs as invalid
when the Javadoc only discussed positive ones. The judge also
struggled with ambiguous descriptions that human annotators

could resolve from context. The former reflects strict adher-
ence to explicit documentation, the latter conservative rejection
of under-specified wording, both of which cause the estimated
precision to be a lower bound on BFINDER’s true precision.
As the invalid strata comprises only 4.3% of the judgments,
the overall precision remains high, despite the judge being
conservative with the invalid strata. Applying the stratified
proportion estimator [53](Ch 5.6), the estimated total number
of valid behaviours (VB
est
) surfaced by BFINDER is:
VB
est 
= n
valid 
· ˆp
valid 
+ n
invalid 
· ˆp
invalid
VB
est 
= 19,829 · 0.96 + 900 · 0.28 = 19,288
Precision is then:
ˆ
P
beh 
= 
V B
est
AB 
= 
19,288
20,729 
≈ 0.931
To bound precision uncertainty, we apply a stratified variance
estimator with finite population correction:
Var( 
ˆ
P
beh
) = 
1
N 
2
X
h∈{v,i}
N 
2
h 
· 
1 − f
h
n
h
· ˆp
h
(1 − ˆp
h
)
where f
h 
= n
h
/N
h 
is the sampling fraction for stratum h.
This yields standard error SE( 
ˆ
P
beh
) ≈ 0.0266.
Implication: This analysis shows that BFINDER is able to
reliably extract real behaviours from software methods and
their documentation with high precision. The methodology
also demonstrates how a carefully-developed and validated
automated judge can be shown to have substantial inter-rater
reliability compared to multiple human labellers, enabling
analysis of whole datasets instead of small manual samples.
The judge’s errors were not random. Failures in behaviour
extraction concentrated in cases where behaviours were im-
plied by context rather than explicitly stated, or where doc-
umentation was ambiguous. Both failure modes cause un-
derestimation: implied behaviours that the judge rejects are
real behaviours that do not enter the reference set; ambigu-
ous behaviours flagged as invalid reduce the denominator of
confirmed gaps. As new models are developed that could be
used for the behaviour extractor or judge, more of these cases
could be resolved correctly, increasing the estimated number
of valid behaviours that can be checked against existing test
cases.
RQ1: Precision of BFINDER’s behaviour extraction.
Across all evaluated projects, BFINDER conservatively
yields a behaviour detection precision of 93.1% ±
2.7%. This high precision and low variance demon-
strate that BFINDER can consistently extract valid
expected behaviours, establishing a reliable foundation
for downstream test adequacy analysis.
B. RQ2 (Prevalence): Do developer-written test suites exhibit
behavioural gaps in practice?
A test suite can execute every line of code and still leave
expected behaviours un-validated by the test suite, as shown
in Section II. Using the 20,729 extracted behaviours from
RQ1, we next investigated how prevalent these validation
gaps were across the developer-written test suites in our ten
project dataset. Following the process in Figure 2(c), BFINDER
identifies 5,083 untested behaviours (UTB) in the dataset. In
this research question we follow the same two-step process as
RQ1: first, we establish human consensus labels to determine
whether these gaps are valid. Second, we build a new LLM-
based judge and compare its labelling performance against
the prior human labels and use this to assess BFINDER’s gap
identification precision. Third, we manually examined the gaps
to learn which kinds of gaps exist in practice.
1) How prevalent are behavioural gaps in developer-written
test suites?: We first assess how precisely BFINDER is able
to assess behavioural gaps, and model their existence.
Gap assessment judge: This judge is based on the same
judge design as used in RQ1. For each untested behaviour,
the judge is provided with the behaviour text, the method’s
documentation, implementation, and any test cases that di-
rectly or transitively invoke the method. The judge then either
labels the behaviour as already tested by the existing test
suite, or that the behaviour is untested and represents a
valid behavioural gap. Across the 5,083 UTBs surfaced by
BFINDER, the judge classified 4,722 (92.9%) behaviours as
untested and 361 (7.1%) behaviours as already tested.
Validating gap judge against human labels: We validate the
judge’s output against human labellers before applying it at
scale. We used the same disproportional stratified sampling
approach as in RQ1. Two authors independently annotated
100 samples, drawing 50 from the judge’s untested stratum
and 50 from the already tested stratum, distributed across all
10 projects. The independent human labels achieved almost
perfect agreement (Cohen’s κ = 0.83). Disagreements were
resolved collaboratively to produce consensus labels, serv-
ing as the ground truth reference against which the judge’s
predictions are compared. We believe human consensus is
the appropriate ground truth for these tasks as the goal is
to interpret what a human developer would expect rather
than what the documentation strictly states. Comparing the
gap assessment judge against these consensus labels yields
κ = 0.66, representing substantial agreement. A post-hoc
power analysis (α = 0.05, power = 0.90) indicates that our
sample of 100 exceeds the minimum required threshold of 98.
Estimating UTB prevalence in developer-written suites: We
applied the same stratified proportion estimator from RQ1 to
obtain a lower bound on the true number of behavioural gaps.
Based on the consensus labelling, in the untested behaviour
stratum, 38 out of 50 samples were confirmed as genuine
gaps (ˆp
valid
=0.76). In the already tested stratum, 45 out of 50
samples were truly already tested, meaning 5 were missed gaps
incorrectly classified as covered (ˆp
invalid
=0.10). Specifically,

the judge tended to flag behaviours as untested when coverage
was implicit rather than explicit, such as contracts enforced
through method chaining or transitive test execution where a
test exercises the behaviour without a direct assertion. Using
the stratified proportion estimator, the number of valid untested
behaviours (V U T B
est
) reported by BFINDER is:
V U T B
est 
= 4,722 · 0.76 + 361 · 0.10 = 3,625
Precision is then:
ˆ
P
utb 
= 
V U T B
est
U T B 
= 
3,625
5,083 
≈ 0.713
The standard error for this analysis is 0.056. For the projects
in the dataset we therefore estimate that 71.3% ± 5.6%
of the untested behaviours identified by BFINDER represent
behaviours a developer would expect of a method, but are not
tested by the existing test suite. Applying this precision to the
all behaviours (AB) identified in RQ1 yields:
U T B
est 
= 
U T B
AB 
· P
utb 
= 
5,083
20,729 
· 0.713 ≈ 0.175
This means that across the ten projects and their test suites
in the dataset, 17.5% of the detected expected behaviours
represent valid behavioural gaps. Behavioural gaps range from
6.6%–29.3% across projects, with jfreechart as the largest
outlier. Removing jfreechart from the aggregate yields a gap
of 15.1%. Every project in the dataset exhibits gaps, including
those with the strongest structural metrics (Table I): commons-
cli (98.2% line, 93% kill) still has a 6.6% gap, and commons-
csv (99.6% line, 95% kill) has 9.1%. This is a project-level
companion to RQ4’s method-level result.
TABLE III: Per-project lower bound estimates for the be-
havioural gaps across the dataset.
Detected Lower Bound Lower Bound
Project UTB UTB Behavioural Gap
commons-cli 39 28 6.6%
commons-codec 277 198 16.3%
commons-compress 413 295 18.3%
commons-jxpath 52 37 20.2%
commons-collections 690 492 17.5%
commons-lang 1,387 989 12.8%
commons-csv 46 33 9.1%
gson 105 75 13.5%
jfreechart 1,863 1,328 29.3%
jsoup 211 150 12.3%
Total 5,083 3,625 17.5%
2) What kinds of behaviours do developers overlook in
their test suites?: We further examined the UTBs to identify
the kinds of behaviours developers frequently miss when
constructing their existing test suites, despite these suites
having high code coverage. To do this, we used an open
coding grounded theory methodology. The authors iterated
through a set of valid untested behaviours, identifying labels
that summarized each behaviour. These labels were merged
iteratively until saturation was reached. The most common
categories of untested behaviours in developer-written test
suites, and an example behaviour of each, includes:
• Exceptions: Cases where methods are expected to consis-
tently throw a specific exception under a given condition.
For example, “Throws a NullPointerException
when the input iterable is null.”
• Side Effects: Behaviour describing how a method alters
internal state or data beyond what is directly returned.
For example, “Preserves existing entries in the original
bag without applying the transformer.”
• Handling null/empty inputs: Explicit documentation of
return values or behaviours for null inputs, empty inputs,
or absent data. For example, “Returns null when the
provided map does not contain the specified key.”
• Construction & configuration: Rules describing how ob-
jects are initialized or configured. For example, “Con-
structs a new, empty map with the specified maximum
size and load factor.”
• Content of returned value: Descriptions of the content
or structure of the return value. For example, “Return
the previous value of the passed element before it was
updated.”
• Algorithmic logic: Descriptions of specific computa-
tional rules or constraints. For example, “Clamps the
endIndexExclusive parameter to the array length
if it exceeds the array length.”
Implication: The dataset consists of popular, well-maintained
libraries with high structural coverage and kill scores. This
means the 17.5% gap observed by BFINDER is likely conser-
vative and could be larger for projects that have made less
extensive investments in their automated test suites. Table III
shows the per-project breakdown of the identified gaps. These
results show that all ten projects exhibit untested behaviours,
with a consistent direction (gaps range from 6.6%–29.3%).
Notably, none of the categories of untested behaviours seem
inherently untestable. Ensuring objects are constructed appro-
priately, handle errors correctly, have expected side effects, and
return properly-updated values are all observable by standard
automated testing approaches. While exploring the categories,
we found five gaps that pointed to inconsistencies and we
reported them to their respective open-source projects, and all
of them were fixed.
As in RQ1, the 17.5% UTB rate represents a lower bound
with respect to the capability of the models used by BFINDER
and the judge. The 71.3% precision already discounts cases
where the mapper reported a gap for a behaviour the test
suite in fact validated, so the 17.5% estimate is not inflated by
those false positives. It cannot, however, account for untested
behaviours the mapper wrongly treated as validated, nor for
behaviours the extractor never surfaced; neither appears among
the 5,083 candidates the judge examined. A more capable
extractor would surface a higher number of valid behaviours,
and a more capable mapper would mislabel fewer untested
behaviours as validated, so stronger models move the corrected
estimate upward rather than down.

RQ2: Prevalence of dev-written behavioural gaps.
Across ten well-tested Java systems, at least 17.5% of
the detected behaviours are not validated by developer-
written test suites. These gaps arise for a variety of
reasons, none of which are because the behaviours are
inherently untestable.
C. RQ3 (Generalization): To what extent are automatically-
generated test suites prone to behavioural gaps?
This research question seeks to investigate whether be-
havioural gaps are inherent to developer-written suites, or a
systemic limitation of structure-guided testing practices. To
do this, we evaluate whether behavioural gaps persist in test
suites created by automatic test generation approaches. We
chose two state-of-the-art (SOTA) automated test generators:
EvoSuite [23] and ASTER [24], to evaluate whether they can
systematically close behavioural gaps. ASTER was selected
because it represents the SOTA for LLM-supported test gen-
eration, and is a shipping industrial product for automatically
generating test suites. EvoSuite was selected because it is the
baseline test generation tool widely used in academia, and
was also used by the ASTER team in their own comparative
evaluation. Evaluating whether automatically generated test
suites would help contextualize whether behavioural gaps
are just a byproduct of misplaced human effort, or a more
pervasive testing challenge.
Methodology: ASTER provides a robust replication package
including both ASTER and EvoSuite generated tests for eight
projects. Unfortunately, ASTER is not publicly available so
we restricted our analysis to the four projects in the ASTER
dataset that intersected with the projects in our dataset. To
enable a fair comparison between the three tools, we only
evaluated ASTER-BFINDER on public documented methods
ASTER was able to generate tests for. The same holds for
the methods examined in the EvoSuite-BFINDER comparison.
This accounts for the different method counts in Table V.
To ensure behavioural gaps were not just due to test
suites having low structural metric values, we also computed
the line coverage for the analyzed methods used for each
test generation tool. For ASTER, 81.2% of methods achieve
91–100% line coverage; for EvoSuite, 89.7% achieve 91-100%
line coverage.
Since the four projects were already in our dataset, we
already had the expected behaviours for all of the methods
being analyzed, but BFINDER had to be executed again with
the test suites generated by ASTER and EvoSuite to identify
the behavioural gaps in these suites. For this analysis we
only report the estimated number of behavioural gaps by
multiplying the number of UTBs identified by BFINDER by
the 0.713 precision from RQ2.
Estimating UTB prevalence in generated suites: The be-
havioural gaps left by both ASTER and EvoSuite are reported
in Table V. In summary, 27.1% of expected behaviours were
not validated by the ASTER-generated suites and 20.6% of
TABLE IV: UTB and method concentration across coverage
buckets (aggregated across all projects). UTBs (%) is the share
of total UTBs falling in each bucket. Methods (%) is the share
of total methods in each bucket.
Line Coverage Mutation Score
Bucket UTBs (%) Methods (%) UTBs (%) Methods (%)
≤70% 5.2 2.8 44.3 24.3
71–80% 4.1 2.4 3.0 3.1
81–90% 5.4 2.6 2.6 2.7
91–100% 85.4 92.3 50.1 69.8
TABLE V: Behavioural gap results for ASTER and EvoSuite
across four projects. Beh. Gap% is the conservative lower-
bound estimate of confirmed behavioural gaps using the
developer-written confirmation rate of 71.3%.
Project Tool Methods UTBs Beh. Gap%
commons-cli ASTER 169 91 19.5%
commons-codec ASTER 275 255 27.7%
commons-compress ASTER 200 165 31.7%
commons-jxpath ASTER 134 108 28.4%
Total 778 619 27.1%
commons-cli EvoSuite 213 122 20.7%
commons-codec EvoSuite 470 318 20.8%
commons-compress EvoSuite 812 440 22.3%
commons-jxpath EvoSuite 292 120 15.8%
Total 1,787 1,000 20.6%
the expected behaviours were not validated by the EvoSuite-
generated suites. These levels of behavioural gaps both exceed
the developer-written suites for these four projects, as detailed
in Table III.
This suggests that neither EvoSuite, a search-based test
generator, nor ASTER, an LLM-based test generator are
immune to missing expected behaviours in software systems.
One reason for this could be because neither ASTER nor
EvoSuite use documentation to guide their test generation.
We also examined Judot [36], a documentation-aware test
generator that uses JDoctor to extract pre- and postconditions
from structured Javadoc tags. Across the four projects, it
generated tests for only 149 methods, compared to 778 for
ASTER and 1,787 for EvoSuite, since its parser is limited to
formal tags and ignores narrative documentation. On the meth-
ods it did reach, the tests showed a 42.5% behavioural gap,
suggesting that even documentation-aware generation, when
restricted to structured tags, captures only a fraction of the
behaviours developers express in method-level documentation.
Implication: Both of the test generation approaches failed
to have smaller behavioural gaps than the developer-written
suites. This suggests that behavioural gaps do not arise due to
developer inattention, but instead because they capture aspects
of software validation that are orthogonal to the structural
metrics test generation approaches traditionally optimize for.

RQ3: Prevalence of generated behavioural gaps.
Behavioural gaps are not unique to developer-written
suites. Suites generated by ASTER and EvoSuite ex-
hibit behavioural gaps of 27.1% and 20.6% respec-
tively, despite achieving strong structural coverage on
the methods they exercise.
D. RQ4 (Implication): Do behavioural gaps alias traditional
structural metrics?
Line coverage and mutation kill score are the two most
common proxies for test suite adequacy [54]. Line coverage
records whether source lines are executed; mutation kill score
additionally requires that assertions detect injected faults. If ei-
ther metric already captured behavioural gaps, a method with a
strong structural score would contain few untested behaviours,
and identifying behavioural gaps would add nothing beyond
what these metrics already report. We test this for each metric
in turn by asking whether a method’s structural score predicts
its behavioural coverage, and whether untested behaviours
disappear once that score is high. We report Spearman’s ρ
(behavioural coverage is not normally distributed) [55] and the
variance explained by OLS R
2
, and we measure how strongly
untested behaviours concentrate in low-scoring methods with
Cohen’s h, comparing the share of UTBs in the top score
bucket against the share of methods in that bucket. Table IV
reports the bucket distribution for developer-written suites in
the dataset.
Line coverage: Line coverage confers almost no information
about behavioural gaps. Its correlation with behavioural cover-
age is negligible (ρ = 0.112, R
2 
= 0.007). The distribution of
UTBs across coverage buckets nearly matches the distribution
of methods: 85.4% of UTBs fall in the 91–100% bucket along
with 92.3% of all methods. The effect size of the difference
is considered small (Cohen’s h = 0.22). High coverage does
not eliminate gaps; among methods with 100% line coverage,
38.2% still contain at least one untested behaviour. A method
can execute every line under test and still leave documented
behaviour untested, as demonstrated by the emptyArray()
example in Section II.
Mutation kill score: Killing a mutant confers more infor-
mation because killing a mutant requires assertions to detect
behaviours rather than only executing code. Kill score corre-
lates more strongly with behavioural coverage (ρ = 0.377).
Untested behaviours are more prevalent in methods with low
kill score (44.3% of UTBs fall in the ≤ 70% kill score bucket
containing only 24.3% of methods); the effect size of the rela-
tionship is considered medium (Cohen’s h = 0.41). Although
a stronger relationship exists than for coverage, kill score
explains only 16% of the variance in behavioural coverage
(R
2 
= 0.162), leaving most of the difference unaccounted for.
High kill scores also do not eliminate behavioural gaps as
29.6% of methods with a perfect mutation kill score contain
at least one untested behaviour. A strong kill score lowers the
odds of a behavioural gap without ruling one out. For both
metrics, a chi-square test of homogeneity confirms that the
distribution of UTBs across buckets differs significantly from
the distribution of methods (p < 0.001).
Implication: The same observations above hold for the au-
tomatically generated suites. Among methods with a perfect
structural score, using ASTER 43% (coverage) / 38% (kill
score) still contain untested behaviours; using EvoSuite, 32%
(coverage) / 34% (kill score) also contain untested behaviours,
so the gap does not close even with generated test suites.
Neither structural metric certifies that a method’s docu-
mented behaviour is validated. Line coverage is effectively
uninformative about behavioural gaps, and mutation kill score
is only a weak signal that still misses gaps in nearly a third
of methods with a perfect kill score. Behavioural coverage is
therefore a complementary dimension of test adequacy rather
than a restatement of either metric. We note that this analysis
bounds the relationship from one side only: the 17.5% figure
is a lower bound on confirmed gaps, because BFINDER is
not guaranteed to surface every untested behaviour. Whether
additional gaps go undetected is left to future evaluation.
RQ4: Do UTBs alias existing structural metrics?
Line coverage is effectively uninformative about be-
havioural gaps, and mutation kill score is only a
weak signal: for developer-written tests, 38.2% of
methods with perfect line coverage and 29.6% with a
perfect kill score still contain untested behaviours. This
suggests that behavioural coverage is a complementary
dimension of test adequacy.
VI. CONCLUSION
Software testing research has long relied on structural
metrics as proxies for test suite quality, partly because reliable
approaches do not exist for measuring whether a test suite
validates a method’s documented behaviour. In this paper,
we introduce the BFINDER proof-of-concept that extracts
method-level expected behaviours from documentation and
source code, maps them to test cases, and identifies which
documented behaviours go untested. Across 8,922 methods
in ten well-tested Java libraries, BFINDER surfaces 20,729
behaviours at 93.1% ± 2.7% precision. At least 17.5% of
those detected behaviours are untested in developer-written
suites. Test suites generated by ASTER / EvoSuite leave
27.1% / 20.6% of detected behaviours untested, both exceed-
ing developer-written behavioural gaps on the same projects.
Qualitative inspection of the missed behaviours (exception
handling, side effects, null input handling) confirms that none
are inherently untestable. Behavioural gaps provide useful
independent insight from structural metrics: Among methods
with perfect line coverage in our dataset, 38.2% still contain
at least one behavioural gap; among methods with perfect
mutation kill scores, 29.6% do. Spearman correlations of 0.112
(line) and 0.377 (mutation) confirm that neither metric reliably
predicts behavioural gaps. Ultimately, coverage reports and
kill scores tell developers how thoroughly the implementation

has been exercised, but behavioural gap analysis can provide
novel test adequacy insight into whether code was validated
consistently with its expected behaviour.
REFERENCES
[1] W. E. Howden, “Functional program testing,” Transactions on Software
Engineering (TSE), vol. SE-6, pp. 162–169, 1978.
[2] D. J. Richardson, O. O’Malley, and C. Tittle, “Approaches to
specification-based testing,” in Proceedings of the Symposium on Testing,
Analysis, and Verification (TAV3), 1989, pp. 86–96.
[3] G. J. Myers, The Art of Software Testing. John Wiley & Sons, 1979.
[4] S. B. Hossain, R. Taylor, and M. Dwyer, “Doc2OracLL: Investigating
the impact of documentation on LLM-based test oracle generation,”
2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.09360
[5] G. Fraser and N. Walkinshaw, “Behaviourally adequate software testing,”
in Proceedings International Conference on Software Testing, Verifica-
tion and Validation (ICST), 2012, pp. 300–309.
[6] W. Howden, “Reliability of the path analysis testing strategy,” Trans-
actions on Software Engineering (TSE), vol. SE-2, no. 3, pp. 208–215,
1976.
[7] T. A. Budd, R. J. Lipton, F. G. Sayward, and R. A. DeMillo, “The design
of a prototype mutation system for program testing,” in Proceedings of
the National Computer Conference, 1978, pp. 623–627.
[8] H. Zhu, P. A. V. Hall, and J. H. R. May, “Software unit test coverage
and adequacy,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 29, no. 4, pp.
366–427, 1997.
[9] M. Papadakis, M. Kintis, J. Zhang, Y. Jia, Y. Le Traon, and M. Harman,
“Mutation testing advances: an analysis and survey,” in Advances in
computers. Elsevier, 2019, vol. 112, pp. 275–378.
[10] R. Gopinath, C. Jensen, and A. Groce, “Code coverage for suite eval-
uation by developers,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2014, pp. 72–82.
[11] R. Just, D. Jalali, L. Inozemtseva, M. D. Ernst, R. Holmes, and G. Fraser,
“Are mutants a valid substitute for real faults in software testing?” in
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Foundations of Software
Engineering (ESEC/FSE), 2014, pp. 654–665.
[12] N. Juristo and S. Vegas, “Functional testing, structural testing and code
reading: What fault type do they each detect?” in Empirical Methods
and Studies in Software Engineering. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003,
pp. 208–232.
[13] J. Lawrance, S. Clarke, M. Burnett, and G. Rothermel, “How well
do professional developers test with code coverage visualizations? an
empirical study,” in Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-
Centric Computing (VL/HCC), pp. 53–60.
[14] Y. Zhang and A. Mesbah, “Assertions are strongly correlated with test
suite effectiveness,” in Proceedings of the Joint Meeting on Foundations
of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE), 2015, pp. 214–224.
[15] G. Petrovi´c, M. Ivankovi´c, G. Fraser, and R. Just, “Does mutation
testing improve testing practices?” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2021, pp. 910–921.
[16] J. C. Miller and C. J. Maloney, “Systematic mistake analysis of digital
computer programs,” Communications of the ACM (CACM), vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 58–63, 1963.
[17] J. B. Goodenough and S. L. Gerhart, “Toward a theory of test data
selection,” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 493–510, Apr.
1975.
[18] D. Hamlet, “Foundations of software testing: dependability theory,”
SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes (SEN), vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 128–
139, Dec. 1994.
[19] L. Inozemtseva and R. Holmes, “Coverage is not strongly correlated
with test suite effectiveness,” in Proceedings International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2014, pp. 435–445.
[20] G. Gay, M. Staats, M. Whalen, and M. P. E. Heimdahl, “The risks
of coverage-directed test case generation,” Transactions on Software
Engineering (TSE), vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 803–819, 2015.
[21] H. Lee, G. An, and S. Yoo, “Metamon: Finding inconsistencies be-
tween program documentation and behavior using metamorphic llm
queries,” in International Workshop on Large Language Models for Code
(LLM4Code), 2025, pp. 120–127.
[22] M. Endres, S. Fakhoury, S. Chakraborty, and S. K. Lahiri, “Can large
language models transform natural language intent into formal method
postconditions?” Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering,
vol. 1, pp. 1889–1912, 2023.
[23] G. Fraser and A. Arcuri, “EvoSuite: Automatic test suite generation for
object-oriented software,” in Proceedings of the European Conference
on Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC), 2011, pp. 416–419.
[24] R. Pan, M. Kim, R. Krishna, R. Pavuluri, and S. Sinha, “Aster: Natural
and multi-language unit test generation with llms,” Proceedings of the
International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineer-
ing in Practice (ICSE-SEIP), pp. 413–424, 2024.
[25] J. H. Andrews, L. C. Briand, and Y. Labiche, “Is mutation an appropriate
tool for testing experiments?” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2005, pp. 402–411.
[26] D. Schuler and A. Zeller, “Checked coverage: an indicator for oracle
quality,” Software Testing, Verification and Reliability, vol. 23, no. 7,
pp. 531–551, 2013. [Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/stvr.1497
[27] O. Vera P´erez, B. Danglot, M. Monperrus, and B. Baudry, “A compre-
hensive study of pseudo-tested methods,” Empirical Software Engineer-
ing, vol. 24, 06 2019.
[28] M. Maton, G. M. Kapfhammer, and P. McMinn, “Where tests fall short:
empirically analyzing oracle gaps in covered code,” in Proceedings of
the International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement (ESEM 2025). Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE), 2025.
[29] E. Kurian, D. Briola, P. Braione, and G. Denaro, “Automatically gen-
erating test cases for safety-critical software via symbolic execution,”
Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 199, p. 111629, 2023.
[30] A. Blasi, A. Gorla, M. D. Ernst, and M. Pezz`e, “Call me maybe: Using
NLP to automatically generate unit test cases respecting temporal con-
straints,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE), 2022, pp. 1–11.
[31] M. C. Davis, S. Choi, S. Estep, B. A. Myers, and J. Sunshine,
“Nanofuzz: A usable tool for automatic test generation,” ser. ESEC/FSE
2023. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2023, p. 1114–1126. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3611643.3616327
[32] C. Pacheco, S. K. Lahiri, M. D. Ernst, and T. Ball, “Feedback-directed
random test generation,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2007, pp. 75–84.
[33] Y. Chen, Z. Hu, C. Zhi, J. Han, S. Deng, and J. Yin, “Chatunitest: A
framework for llm-based test generation,” in Companion Proceedings of
the 32nd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software
Engineering, 2024, pp. 572–576.
[34] A. Goffi, A. Gorla, M. D. Ernst, and M. Pezz`e, “Automatic generation of
oracles for exceptional behaviors,” in Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA), 2016, pp. 213–
224.
[35] A. Blasi, A. Goffi, K. Kuznetsov, A. Gorla, M. D. Ernst, M. Pezz`e,
and S. D. Castellanos, “Translating code comments to procedure spec-
ifications,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on Software
Testing and Analysis (ISSTA), 2018, pp. 242–253.
[36] G. Denaro and L. Guglielmo, “Automated test generation from program
documentation encoded in code comments,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21161
[37] Y. Zhang, P. Xue, Z. Yang, X. Ren, X. Li, L. Wu, J. Zhao, and
X. Yu, “A framework for creating non-regressive test cases via branch
consistency analysis driven by descriptions,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07486
[38] X. Xu, Z. Wahab, R. Holmes, and C. Lemieux, “Docprism:
Local categorization and external filtering to identify relevant
code-documentation inconsistencies,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2511.00215
[39] M.-F. Wong, S. Guo, C.-N. Hang, S.-W. Ho, and C.-W. Tan, “Natural
language generation and understanding of big code for ai-assisted
programming: A review,” Entropy, vol. 25, no. 6, p. 888, Jun. 2023.
[40] M. P. Robillard, D. M. Arya, N. A. Ernst, J. L. C. Guo, M. Lamothe,
M. Nassif, N. Novielli, A. Serebrenik, I. Steinmacher, and K.-J. Stol,
“Communicating study design trade-offs in software engineering,” ACM
Transactions on Software Engineering Methodology (TOSEM), vol. 33,
no. 5, Jun. 2024.
[41] Q. Team, “Qwen3 technical report,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388
[42] R. Just, D. Jalali, and M. D. Ernst, “Defects4J: A database of existing
faults to enable controlled testing studies for java programs,” in Proceed-
ings of the International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
(ISSTA), 2014, pp. 437–440.

[43] EclEmma and JaCoCo Contributors, “JaCoCo Java Code Coverage Li-
brary,” https://www.jacoco.org/jacoco/trunk/doc/maven.html, 2026, ac-
cessed: 2025-12-25.
[44] PIT Contributors, “PIT: Mutation Testing for Java,” https://pitest.org/,
2026, accessed: 2025-12-22.
[45] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin,
Z. Li, D. Li, E. Xing et al., “Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench
and chatbot arena,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 36, pp. 46 595–46 623, 2023.
[46] A. H. Liu, K. Khandelwal, S. Subramanian, V. Jouault, A. Rastogi
et al., “Ministral 3,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2601.08584
[47] T. Ahmed, P. Devanbu, C. Treude, and M. Pradel, “Can llms replace
manual annotation of software engineering artifacts?” in Proceedings of
the International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR),
2025, pp. 526–538.
[48] J. He, J. Shi, T. Y. Zhuo, C. Treude, J. Sun, Z. Xing, X. Du, and D. Lo,
“Llm-as-a-judge for software engineering: Literature review, vision, and
the road ahead,” Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
(TOSEM), Feb. 2026.
[49] X. Zhou, K. Kim, T. Zhang, M. Weyssow, L. F. Gomes, G. Yang, K. Liu,
X. Xia, and D. Lo, “An llm-as-judge metric for bridging the gap with
human evaluation in se tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20854, 2025.
[50] C. A. Ramezan, T. A. Warner, and A. E. Maxwell, “Evaluation
of sampling and cross-validation tuning strategies for regional-scale
machine learning classification,” Remote Sensing, vol. 11, no. 2, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/11/2/185
[51] M. L. McHugh, “Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic,” Biochemia
medica, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 276–282, 2012.
[52] F. Madadizadeh and S. Bahariniya, “A tutorial on sample size calculation
for inter-rater and intra-rater agreement studies,” Indian Journal of
Psychological Medicine, Feb. 2026.
[53] R. L. Scheaffer, W. Mendenhall, III, R. L. Ott, and K. G. Gerow,
Elementary Survey Sampling, 7th ed. Brooks/Cole, 2012, ch. 5.6.
[54] M. Papadakis, M. Kintis, J. Zhang, Y. Jia, Y. L. Traon, and M. Harman,
“Mutation testing advances: An analysis and survey,” ser. Advances in
Computers, A. M. Memon, Ed. Elsevier, 2019, vol. 112, pp. 275–378.
[55] C. Spearman, The proof and measurement of association between two
things. Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1961.
