
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2606.31511

Falsification, Not Exposure: An Internally
Preregistered Placebo-Controlled
Decomposition of Self-Repair Feedback in
Frozen Small Code Models
Mehmet İşcan
∗
PythaLab, Yıldız Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
Abstract
In deployment settings where retraining is not feasible, small frozen code
models are commonly asked to repair a failed program after being shown
their own failing output. This practice is often treated as an additional
retry mechanism. From a Popperian perspective, however, it raises a deeper
epistemic and measurement problem. A generated program can be viewed
as a tentative conjecture, while a violation observed during test execution
can be viewed as a test-oracle-relative and executable counterexample. The
scientific value of feedback should therefore be attributed not to re-exposure
to failing code itself, but to whether the candidate conjecture is opened to
external, executable, and auditable criticism. Prior work has often bun-
dled failing code, execution evidence, and retry instruction into a single
feedback packet, without decomposing packet components against a blind
resampling baseline under the same output-generation budget and against
content-free placebo controls. As the third stage of a falsification-centered
measurement program, this study presents a placebo-controlled evaluation
instrument that compares bare failing code, executed facts, code-plus-facts,
neither, and template- and bullet-count-matched placebo conditions on the
same task–model units. The contribution is not a new repair algorithm,
but a reflexive measurement methodology combining packet decomposition,
placebo mirroring, matched-budget comparison, same-unit discordant-pair
evaluation, fresh-generation confirmation, and provenance-based executable
audits, so that both the model’s program conjecture and the researcher’s
claim that “feedback content works” are made falsifiable. Across six Hu-
manEval+ and MBPP+ benchmark×model cells with three 0.5B–1.5B
frozen code models, 290 dead task–cell units were evaluated, where no
candidate in a cached best-of-N pool (N = 8) passed the public tier. The
main run produced 7,000 fresh seeded generations, and a preregistered
diagnostic follow-up produced 1,400 additional generations. True unlock
required passing both the public and prompt-hidden EvalPlus tiers. Blind
resampling exceeded bare-code retry by +18 net unlocks (discordant 25/7,
Holm-adjusted p = 0.0021). Code-plus-facts produced +18 net recovery
relative to bare code (discordant 21/3, Holm-adjusted p = 0.00042), and
a +15 advantage over the same-code generic-bullet placebo supported the
contribution of executed fact content (Holm-adjusted p = 0.0041). In the
diagnostic follow-up, an instruction-only effect was not distinguishable (+3,
p = 0.36), which is not evidence of absence. The remaining difference was
associated with code-bearing context, although pure code causation was
∗
Corresponding author. PythaLab, Yıldız Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey. E-mail:
miscan@yildiz.edu.tr.
Preprint.
arXiv:2606.31511v1 [cs.SE] 30 Jun 2026

not claimed because code content remained confounded with prompt length.
Code-plus-facts and blind resampling tied at the pooled level with 26 unlocks
each, which is not evidence of equivalence, non-inferiority, non-superiority,
or unit-level identical behavior, but only zero observed pooled difference
in the tested sample. The content-attribution contrast changed direction
in a small disjoint sensitivity sample, and surface-form explanations were
not fully ruled out. Six prospective external-controller follow-ups on the
search-bound stratum further supported this boundary: the two strongest
content channels, own near-miss code and runtime execution trace, tied
with content-free shape placebo. The findings are limited to observed un-
lock outcomes and make no direct claim about latent sampling capacity,
model distribution, or general program-synthesis ability. Taken together,
falsification in the tested frozen-small-model regime was valuable not as
Popperian vocabulary, verbal self-critique, or re-exposure to failing code,
but as comparison with externally produced, oracle-relative, executable
counterexamples. This execution-grounded criticism was observed as a
limited signal repairing harmful code-bearing conditioning, not as a content
lever exceeding blind resampling. The transferable contribution is therefore
a methodology for making self-repair feedback claims falsifiable through
content-vs-form, discovery-vs-confirmation, and audit-vs-statistical-verdict
distinctions.
Keywords: large language models, code generation, self-repair, execution feedback, prereg-
istration, placebo control, falsification, small language models
1 Introduction
Small frozen code models now appear regularly in laptop, local workstation, and edge-
device deployment settings where retraining is not feasible. In such settings, the model
is often expected to generate not a single final program, but multiple candidate programs
under a fixed generation budget. When a candidate program fails the tests, generation
is repeated, and the operational work unit is therefore formed not as a single completion
but as a retry loop (J. Wang et al., 2024; Zubair, Al-Hitmi, & Catal, 2025). Within this
retry loop, adding the failed program back to the prompt, showing the evidence obtained
during execution, and asking the model to produce a corrected solution have been adopted as
natural debugging practices. However, the intuitive appeal of this practice often leads three
distinct assumptions to be accepted jointly: it is assumed that showing the failing code again
is useful, that execution evidence carries an additional signal, and that feedback-assisted
retry is more effective than fresh sampling performed under the same output-generation
budget.
This problem can be formulated not only as a technical prompt-design issue, but also
as a Popperian conjectures-and-refutations process (Popper, 1959, 1963). The generated
program can be treated as a conjecture whose correctness is only tentatively accepted.
The violation observed in the executed test can then be interpreted as an executable
counterexample, produced against a specific behavioral consequence of that conjecture and
relative to the test oracle. From this perspective, the value of self-repair feedback should
arise not from re-exposing the model to its own failed output, but from opening that output
to external, execution-grounded, and auditable criticism. The central question is therefore
not whether feedback is useful in general. The sharper question is which form of refutation
carries operational signal: exposure to failing code, executed counterevidence, generic retry
instruction, or blind resampling under the same budget.
The expectation that feedback may be useful is supported primarily by findings reported
on stronger models or on models specifically trained to use feedback. Iterative self-refinement
has been reported to provide improvement across different task families (Madaan et al., 2023;
Shinn et al., 2023), and execution-grounded debugging loops have been shown to improve
performance when test results and traces are incorporated back into the prompt (X. Chen,
Lin, Schärli, & Zhou, 2024; Zhong, Wang, & Shang, 2024). It has also been shown that
33B open models trained for multi-turn execution feedback can reach high pass rates on
HumanEval and MBPP (T. Zheng et al., 2024). For this reason, feedback-driven repair is
2

treated as one of the central workflows in large language model (LLM)-based software testing
and program-repair reviews (Takallou, Gautam, & Shirolkar, 2026; J. Wang et al., 2024;
Zubair et al., 2025).
By contrast, it has been shown that intrinsic self-correction can reduce reasoning ac-
curacy when no external signal is available (Huang et al., 2024; Valmeekam, Marquez,
& Kambhampati, 2023), that self-critique without a sound checker can degrade symbolic
reasoning (Stechly, Valmeekam, & Kambhampati, 2025), and that models cannot reliably
verify their own code against natural-language specifications (Jin & Chen, 2025). When the
cost of feedback turns is taken into account, self-repair gains have also been reported to be
dominated by additional independent samples (Olausson, Inala, Wang, Gao, & Solar-Lezama,
2024). This limitation appears especially pronounced for code models below a few billion
parameters. Reliable self-refinement is often obtained only when retraining is performed with
the relevant objective (Cho, Kang, Kim, & Lee, 2025; Ding, Min, Kaiser, & Ray, 2024; Jiang
et al., 2024). It has also been reported that runtime feedback is “not always helpful” for small
open models (Tian et al., 2024), that the generation–verification gap remains non-positive at
the 0.5B scale (Song et al., 2025), and that self-generated reasoning can reduce pass rates
for lightweight models (Yang et al., 2024).
In this regime, where retraining is excluded, the true competitor of feedback-assisted repair
is not another prompting recipe but the use of the same output-generation budget for fresh
samples. Under repeated sampling, coverage has been shown to scale across broad budget
ranges (Brown et al., 2024), and “more samples” has been used as a fundamental baseline for
adaptive methods in compute-optimal test-time strategies (Damani, Shenfeld, Peng, Bobu,
& Andreas, 2025; Snell, Lee, Xu, & Kumar, 2025). More elaborate verification strategies
have been reported to require additional compute even to match plain repeated sampling
(Singhi et al., 2025), while multi-turn self-repair can fall below independent sampling under
equal output budget (K. Zheng et al., 2025). The decisive operational question is therefore
not whether a revision is better than the previous completion. It must be tested directly
whether the same generation budget should be allocated to retry with failing context or to
blind resampling after discarding that context.
This study is positioned as the third stage of a falsification-centered measurement program
in which this question has been progressively narrowed. In the first stage of the program,
Popperian code-generation skill was decomposed through a labels-only scaffold, a length-
matched placebo, and an execution oracle (İşcan, 2026a). It was shown that full Popperian
procedural content did not provide a separable execution-correctness contribution over the
labels-only scaffold, and that the gain observed in the small model was associated more with
scaffold structure than with Popperian vocabulary. The same model’s self-selection using a
Popperian rubric also did not exceed random selection. In the second stage of the program,
falsification was moved from prompt content to post-hoc candidate processing (İşcan, 2026b).
Twenty-six semantic post-hoc operators, including selection, verification, repair, elimination,
sound vetoes, and generation conditioning, are evaluated against a Best-of-N baseline under
a deterministic execution oracle and a leakage-free matched-compute protocol. No semantic
output-space operator exceeded held-out accuracy over Best-of-N in the tested cells. Thus,
Popperian vocabulary and model-internal post-hoc falsification are found not to carry a
separable signal, and the remaining question is directed toward whether externally executed
counterevidence can carry signal within iterative regeneration.
Four identification problems in the literature prevent this question from being answered
directly. First, positive studies often present failing code, execution evidence, and repair
instruction inside a single feedback bundle. Therefore, the component from which the
reported gain arises cannot be determined. Second, negative studies often remove the bundle
entirely. As a result, it cannot be disambiguated whether the observed harm arises from
the revision act, failing code, execution evidence, or the surface form of additional context.
Third, when feedback-assisted regeneration and blind resampling are not compared under
the same output-generation budget, the practitioner’s choice is not directly tested. Fourth,
aggregate pass rates over tasks that can already be solved by ordinary sampling provide
only limited information about the zero-pass-in-pool regime in which the retry loop is most
needed.
These identification problems are compounded when the independent effects of prompt
surface form are taken into account. In large-scale software-engineering evaluations, the
feedback packet is often treated as a single intervention (Z. Zheng et al., 2025). Although
3

prompt-ingredient sweeps have begun to separate certain components, the model’s own
failing code is often not evaluated as an independent arm, and same-unit outcomes are not
paired through discordant-pair tests (Khojah, de Oliveira Neto, Mohamad, & Leitner, 2025).
It is also known that prompt formatting and arbitrary prompt architecture can affect outputs
independently of task content (Brucks & Toubia, 2025; Sclar, Choi, Tsvetkov, & Suhr, 2024).
Therefore, an ordinary no-feedback control is not sufficient to separate task-relevant fact
content from the effects of additional text presence, template, and bullet structure.
For all these reasons, the placebo-controlled disambiguation protocol of the program is
transferred in this study to the axis of self-repair feedback content, and a five-arm controlled
decomposition is presented. Bare failing code (P), blind resampling (B), executed facts
only (TC), code plus facts (CF-SF), and code plus generic placebo bullets (GR-SHAPE) are
compared on the same task–model units and under the same output-generation budget.
Through the mirror chain, source code, failure instruction, template, and bullet count are
held fixed between CF-SF and GR-SHAPE, while only task-relevant fact content is changed.
This comparison constitutes the most tightly controlled content contrast in the design. By
contrast, exact token length, lexical distribution, numeric-literal density, literal input/output
(I/O) syntax, and information density are not held fixed. The B–P and CF-SF–P comparisons
are defined as packet-level effects. Since these arms follow independent trajectories, they are
not interpreted as same-code minimal pairs. The independent role of failure instruction is
additionally tested through a preregistered sixth arm.
The primary estimand is defined on dead task–cell units for which no candidate in a
cached best-of-N pool (N = 8) passed the public tier. The term “dead” does not mean
that no correct program exists in the model distribution. It denotes only zero-pass status
with respect to the finite cached pool. Across six benchmark×model cells constructed
from HumanEval+ and MBPP+ with three 0.5B–1.5B frozen code models, 290 dead units
are evaluated. The same output-generation budget is allocated to each arm for each unit.
Because input-token compute is not equalized, the term matched output-generation budget is
used throughout the study. Correctness is determined by execution on public EvalPlus tests
and prompt-hidden EvalPlus tests that are not shown in the prompt (Liu, Xia, Wang, &
Zhang, 2023). This design controls the advantage of producing more output samples and
allows the content, form, and exposure components of the feedback packet to be evaluated
within the same operational decision problem.
The measurement logic of the study is not limited to arm decomposition. Discovery and
confirmation are separated. Unplanned contrasts observed in the preceding preregistered
stage are not used as confirmatory evidence, but are treated only as discovery signals that
generate new hypotheses. Each effect is promoted only once to a new preregistered family, is
re-measured on the same fixed units with fresh seeds and fresh generations, and discovery
outputs are not included in the confirmation analysis (Hofman, Chatzimparmpas, Sharma,
Watts, & Hullman, 2023; Mayo & Spanos, 2006; Popper, 1959, 1963). Thus, fresh-output
confirmation is provided, but no independent-task replication claim is made. This distinction
is built into the measurement design to prevent exploratory evidence from being mixed with
confirmatory evidence.
This procedure also establishes Popperian falsification not only as an object-level test of
programs but also as a reflexive evaluation architecture. At the object level, generated pro-
grams are treated as conjectures, and executed test violations are treated as counterexamples.
At the meta-methodological level, the study’s own hypotheses, contrasts, and evaluation
pipeline are kept open to criticism through preregistration, placebo controls, fresh-generation
confirmation, and executable audit invariants. When an audit failure occurs, the original
verdict is not deleted and the amendment is reported separately, in order to prevent negative
evidence from being neutralized by post hoc reinterpretation. Thus, falsification is operated
not only as a test directed at model outputs, but also as a critical-control discipline to which
the research system that produces claims about those outputs is itself subjected.
No new repair method is proposed in this study. Instead, a component-level measurement
methodology is presented for measuring in what form the falsification signal is carried within
the self-repair feedback packet. The originality of this methodology is established through
the decomposition of the feedback packet into its components, the testing of surface-form
explanations through content-free placebo controls, the comparison against blind resampling
under a matched output-generation budget, the use of same-unit discordant-pair evaluation,
and the separation of statistical verdict from audit verdict. In this way, claims about
4

self-repair feedback are made measurable not only through aggregate pass rates, but also
through the layers of content, form, sampling budget, confirmation status, and executable
provenance.
In this framework, the study makes five original contributions. The first is philosoph-
ical and conceptual: self-repair feedback is reformulated not merely as an iterative retry
practice but as a measurable falsification problem grounded in the Popperian conjecture–
counterexample relation, and by treating generated programs as conjectures and executed
test violations as oracle-relative executable counterexamples, the distinction between ex-
posure and criticism is made explicit, and falsification is applied not only to object-level
program outputs but also to the researcher’s claims about feedback content. The second is a
measurement and evaluation contribution: a five-arm controlled decomposition is developed
to separate the components inside the feedback packet, in which bare failing code, blind
resampling, executed facts, code-plus-facts, and shape-matched placebo arms are compared
on the same task–model units and under the same output-generation budget, so that packet
decomposition, placebo mirroring, a matched-budget baseline, same-unit discordant-pair eval-
uation, fresh-generation confirmation, and provenance-based executable audits are combined
within a single reflexive measurement instrument.
The third is an identification contribution: failing code, execution evidence, and retry
instruction, which are often presented jointly in prior work, are decomposed, so that the same-
code mirror contrast separates executed fact content from generic bullet-shaped companion
text and packet-level contrasts evaluate bare-code retry, code-plus-facts retry, and blind
resampling within the same operational decision problem, leaving the measured recovery less
confounded with exposure, surface form, instruction, or an additional sampling opportunity.
The fourth concerns statistical rigor and confirmation: discovery outputs are not mixed
with confirmation evidence, promoted hypotheses are retested with fresh seeds and fresh
generations, and exact McNemar tests, Holm correction, same-unit paired evaluation, and
a preregistered family structure keep claims bounded by observed contrasts, while non-
significant results, pooled ties, and descriptive guards are not converted into equivalence or
no-effect claims. The fifth is a reproducibility and audit contribution: the evaluation pipeline
is made auditable through immutable unit keys, seed-namespace isolation, frozen prompt
rendering, mirror SHA equality, forbidden-token checks, executable audit invariants, forensic
audit trails, and dated amendments, and statistical verdicts are kept separate from audit
verdicts, so that not only model outputs but also the evaluation system that produces claims
about those outputs is left open to falsification.
The claims are limited to 0.5B–1.5B frozen code models, Python HumanEval+/MBPP+
tasks, the zero-pass-in-pool regime, a single prompt scaffold, and a matched output-generation
budget. No direct inference is made about stronger models, non-dead tasks, other program-
ming languages, or repository-level coding settings. The comparison between code-plus-facts
and blind resampling is interpreted outside the superiority family and is not used to produce
an equivalence or non-inferiority claim. The content-attribution interpretation is limited
to the dimensions held fixed inside the mirror chain and does not assume equality of exact
token length or lexical distribution.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The measurement instrument, popu-
lation definition, regeneration arms, mirror chain, preregistered statistical family, generation
protocol, and audit invariants are presented in §2. Primary effects, sixth-arm diagnostic
decomposition, content-attribution analyses, sensitivity checks, and audit outcomes are
reported in §3. Mechanism interpretations, prior-work comparison, practical implications,
and validity boundaries are discussed in §4. The prospective external-controller follow-ups
conducted after the primary analysis are given in §4.1. Finally, the bounded conclusion and
transferable methodological contribution of the study are summarized in §5.
2 Methods
The method used in this study was structured as the third stage of a falsification-centered
measurement program applied to feedback content. The placebo-controlled disambiguation
protocol and the leakage-free, matched-budget execution protocol developed in the previous
stages of the program were applied here to the components of an iterative self-repair packet
(İşcan, 2026a, 2026b). At the object level, the generated program is treated as a conjecture.
The violation produced by public test execution is interpreted as an execution-grounded
5

1 UNIT SELECTION 2 PARALLEL CONDITIONING ARMS 3 SCORING AND ENDPOINT
Matched output-generation budget: 4 rounds × 1 candidate per arm
identical decoding | dedicated fresh seeds
DEAD TASK-
CELL UNIT
benchmark ×
model × task
cached best-of-N pool
zero true pass
trajectory-pinned mirror chain
P 
Bare-code retry 
own failing code +
failure instruction 
1 2 3 4
B 
Blind resampling 
original task only;
failure context discarded 
1 2 3 4
TC 
Facts only 
≤ 6 violated public I/O
facts; source code withheld 
1 2 3 4
CF-SF 
Code + same facts 
TC facts + source code
they were run on + instruction 
1 2 3 4
GR-SHAPE 
Code + placebo 
same code, template and
bullet count; generic bullets 
1 2 3 4
facts fixed; add code + instruction
facts → placebo; code/template/count fixed
EXECUTION-BASED
SCORING
1. full public test tier
if passed
2. full prompt-hidden tier
TRUE UNLOCK
≥ 1 of 4 candidates
passes both tiers
CF-SF vs GR-SHAPE is the only same-code content contrast;
all other comparisons are packet-level effects.
Figure 1: Falsification-centered measurement instrument. Each dead unit for which no candidate
in the cached pool passed the public tier was evaluated under five regeneration arms with the same
output-generation budget. Four rounds were run for each arm, one candidate was generated in
each round, and a fresh seed from a dedicated namespace was used. The mirror chain links the
CF-SF packet to the TC trajectory and the GR-SHAPE packet to the CF-SF trajectory. Only in
the CF-SF–GR-SHAPE comparison were source code, failure instruction, template, and bullet count
held fixed while task-relevant fact content was changed. The endpoint is true unlock. At least one
candidate generated under the same arm must pass both the public and prompt-hidden tiers.
and oracle-relative counterexample to that conjecture (Popper, 1959, 1963). At the meta-
methodological level, the strength of the executed counterexample is taken to depend on
assumptions about the test oracle, sandbox, and harness. Because of this Duhem–Quine
boundary, the arm contrasts, statistical claims, and the evaluation pipeline that produced
those claims are kept open to critical testing through preregistration, fresh-generation
confirmation, and executable audit invariants.
A five-arm controlled decomposition was used to measure the component-level effects
of the self-repair feedback packet. Each dead task–cell unit was evaluated under five
parallel regeneration arms with a matched output-generation budget. The outcome was
defined by whether at least one candidate generated under the same arm passed both
the public and prompt-hidden test tiers. The measurement instrument is summarized
in Figure 1. This section describes the population and endpoint, arm definitions, mirror
chain, preregistered statistical family, generation protocol, audit invariants, and discovery-to-
confirmation procedure in sequence. Procedure 1 is given not as a new repair algorithm, but
as the executable evaluation procedure of the measurement instrument.
2.1 Measurement instrument
2.1.1 Population, endpoint, and unit of analysis
Definition 1 (Dead task–cell unit). A cell is defined as a benchmark–model pair. A
task–cell unit is the benchmark task evaluated under a specific cell and is immutably keyed
by ⟨benchmark | model | task⟩. A unit is classified as dead when none of the candidates in the
cached best-of-N pool for that unit (N = 8, fixed by the K_POOL code constant) passes the
public test tier under standard and robust extraction. The per-task candidate cache files are
an uncommitted upstream artifact. This definition is made with respect to the finite cached
pool and does not imply that no correct program exists in the model distribution.
Definition 2 (True unlock). A dead unit is counted as unlocked by a given arm only if
at least one regenerated candidate from that arm passes the full public tier and the full
prompt-hidden tier. Prompt-hidden test cases are not shown to any arm. However, because
6

Table 1: Per benchmark×model cell sample flow. Dead units were first capped at cap = 60
per cell, and pre-run token exclusion was then applied. Primary = capped − exclusions. The
capped total is 291, and the single exclusion (humanevalplus__115) reduces the primary sample to
290. Initial counts were computed from the deterministic EvalPlus loader (MBPP+ 378 nominal
minus 13 loader exclusions = 365, HumanEval+ 164). All counts were recomputed from committed
ANTIDOTE prerun manifests with scripts/reconstruct_sample_selection.py and reproduced
under the seeded selection rule.
Benchmark Model Initial Dead Capped Excl. Primary Disjoint
HumanEval+ deepseek-coder:1.3b 164 119 60 1 59 15
HumanEval+ qwen2.5-coder:0.5b 164 40 40 0 40 0
HumanEval+ qwen2.5-coder:1.5b 164 24 24 0 24 0
MBPP+ deepseek-coder:1.3b 365 171 60 0 60 30
MBPP+ qwen2.5-coder:0.5b 365 111 60 0 60 15
MBPP+ qwen2.5-coder:1.5b 365 47 47 0 47 0
Total 164+365 512 291 1 290 60
the dead population is defined only by public-tier pass/fail outcomes in the cached pool, and
because the prompt-hidden tier defines the final true-unlock scoring endpoint, this tier is
interpreted not as an untouched test set but as a prompt-hidden evaluation tier.
The population was constructed from 512 dead units obtained by crossing the HumanEval+
and MBPP+ benchmarks (Austin et al., 2021; M. Chen et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023) with
three frozen models served through Ollama. The models were fixed as qwen2.5-coder:1.5b,
qwen2.5-coder:0.5b-instruct (fp16), and deepseek-coder:1.3b (Guo et al., 2024; Hui
et al., 2024). The seeded and capped fixed sample used in the predecessor experiment was
inherited unchanged. After the inherited pre-run token exclusion, the primary confirmation
sample was fixed at n = 290. Thus, the promoted hypotheses are retested on the same
task–cell sample in which the discovery effects were produced, but with entirely fresh
generations.
A separate disjoint sample consisting of 60 dead units that had not previously been
included in the primary sample was constructed for external-direction sensitivity. This sample
contains 15 HumanEval+/deepseek units, 30 MBPP+/deepseek units, and 15 MBPP+/qwen-
0.5b units.
The per-cell sample flow is summarized in Table 1. In each cell, dead units were first
capped at cap = 60 per cell, and the pre-run token exclusion was then applied. The only
exclusion was the humanevalplus__115 unit in the HumanEval+/deepseek-coder:1.3b
cell. Therefore, the capped 60 units in that cell were reduced to 59 primary units, yielding
a total primary sample of 290 and a capped total of 291. The disjoint sample was drawn
from the unselected units of each cell. A 32-bit seed derived by sha256 from the payload
antidote-disjoint|benchmark|model and random.Random.sample were used for this se-
lection. The cached best-of-N pool was fixed at N = 8 (K_POOL code constant). Per-task
candidate cache files were retained as an uncommitted upstream artifact.
The provenance of the public and prompt-hidden tiers is given in Table 2. The public
tier consists of EvalPlus base tests. This tier is used by the evaluation harness, but it is not
rendered verbatim in any arm prompt. In the TC and CF-SF arms, only up to six public
assertions violated by the incumbent are shown as literal input/output (I/O) facts. No
test-derived content is provided to the B and P arms. The GR-SHAPE arm is instead given
count-matched generic placebo bullets. The prompt-hidden tier consists of EvalPlus plus
tests and is deterministically capped at the first 300 tests in EvalPlus source order. This
tier is not shown to any arm. Dead-status selection is performed only on the public tier,
whereas the prompt-hidden tier is used only for final true-unlock scoring. Therefore, the
prompt-hidden tier is referred to as the prompt-hidden evaluation tier that defines the final
scoring endpoint and is not presented as an untouched held-out test set.
Units are selected by seeded hash from the eligible pool remaining outside the fixed
sample (§3.2). The disjoint sample is not included in the primary statistical family and is
used only for directional sensitivity.
7

Table 2: Test-tier provenance. The public tier (I
base
, EvalPlus base input suite) is available to
the harness but is not shown verbatim in any arm. It appears only in the TC/CF-SF arms as ≤ 6
violated input/output (I/O) facts. The prompt-hidden tier (I
plus
, EvalPlus plus input suite, first
300 in source order) is not shown to any arm. Dead-status selection depends only on public-tier
outcomes. The prompt-hidden tier is not used for selection and is evaluated only during final
true-unlock scoring. Therefore, it is not an untouched held-out set. All tiers use EvalPlus 0.3.1,
pinned in uv.lock.
Benchmark Tier Source Prompt exposure Dead-status Scoring
HumanEval+ public EvalPlus I
base 
≤ 6 facts (TC/CF-SF) ✓ ✓
HumanEval+ prompt-hidden EvalPlus I
plus 
(first 300) none — ✓
MBPP+ public EvalPlus I
base 
≤ 6 facts (TC/CF-SF) ✓ ✓
MBPP+ prompt-hidden EvalPlus I
plus 
(first 300) none — ✓
Table 3: Prompt-hidden test-count summary. The deterministic first-300 cap binds only on
HumanEval+ (126 tasks truncated, pre-cap median 972, max 1000). On MBPP+ the cap never
binds (max 147). The cap binds the prompt-hidden tier only. Dead-status selection uses public-tier
outcomes only, so the cap affects final true-unlock scoring rather than dead selection.
Benchmark Tasks Median plus Max plus >300 Subset rule
HumanEval+ 164 972 1000 126 first 300 (source order)
MBPP+ 365 105 147 0 first 300 (source order)
Cell-level dead-task counts, model digests, and round-0 prompts are recorded as SHA-
pinned version-controlled manifests before any generation is initiated. This prevents sample
identity and prompt rendering from being changed after the run.
The matched budget was operationalized as an equal output-sample count per unit. Four
regeneration rounds were run for each arm, one candidate was produced in each round, and
identical decoding parameters were used. Thus, four output samples were allocated to each
arm for each unit. Input-token compute was not equalized. Code-bearing prompts reached
approximately 1,290–1,480 characters depending on the arm, compared with a mean length
of approximately 406 characters for B prompts. Therefore, strict end-to-end floating-point
operation (FLOP) matching was not provided. Instead, a matched output-generation budget
was provided. Outcome differences cannot be attributed to generating more candidates.
Prompt length and prefill cost remain residual design factors (Brown et al., 2024; Olausson
et al., 2024; K. Zheng et al., 2025).
2.1.2 Regeneration arms and mirror chain
The five arms shown in Figure 1 are defined in Table 4. In the P condition, the model was
shown its own round-specific best-so-far failing code and was asked to produce a corrected
solution. In each round, the arm-specific incumbent was selected from the union of the
cached best-of-N pool and the candidates generated in the previous rounds of that arm.
Selection was based on the highest public-assert pass count, namely the number of public
assertions passed. When pass counts were tied, ties were resolved deterministically in favor
of the most recently generated candidate. Thus, under a tie, the latest round output rather
than a pool entry was accepted as the incumbent. In the B condition, no failure context
other than the original task was provided, and each round was run as an independent blind
resample. These two arms represent the bare-code retry practice and the discard-the-context
baseline, respectively.
In the TC condition, only execution-grounded counterevidence was presented. Public
assertions violated by the incumbent solution in the corresponding trajectory were shown as
at most six literal I/O facts through a frozen no-ellipsis renderer. These facts were used as
observable counterexamples that refuted a specific behavioral consequence of the candidate’s
correctness conjecture in an oracle-relative manner. The source code on which the facts had
been executed was withheld from the prompt. If the incumbent violates no public assertion,
that is, if all public tests are passed and failure occurs only on the prompt-hidden tier, the
fact block is rendered as an empty block containing only the header line and no bullets.
This empty-violation behavior is shared by the TC, CF-SF, and GR-SHAPE arms. Since the
8

Table 4: Five regeneration arms. Four output generations were used per unit for each arm. In the
CF-SF–GR-SHAPE mirror pair, source code, failure instruction, template, and bullet count were held
fixed, and only task-relevant fact content was changed. The TC–CF-SF transition adds source code
and the failure instruction together. P comparisons involve independent arm trajectories and are
therefore not interpreted as same-code minimal pairs.
Arm Conditioning packet Own code Executed facts Companion text
P bare own failing code (incumbent) ✓ — —
B none (blind resample of the task) — — —
TC violated public I/O facts only (≤ 6) — ✓ —
CF-SF TC’s facts + the code they were run on ✓ ✓ —
GR-SHAPE CF-SF’s code + shape-matched generic bullets ✓ — ✓
GR-SHAPE placebo bullet count mirrors the true fact count in TC, zero true facts correspond
to zero placebo bullets. In this case, the CONFIRM-local renderer inserts no degenerate
fallback sentence.
The three code-bearing arms, P, CF-SF, and GR-SHAPE, were terminated with the
following failure instruction: “Your solution failed the tests. Write a corrected, different
solution.” The two code-free arms, B and TC, did not include this instruction. Therefore, in
the main five-arm design, the failure instruction remained coupled with code-bearing context.
This coupling was tested by a separate preregistered sixth-arm follow-up.
The CF-SF and GR-SHAPE arms were constructed as mirror conditions. In the CF-SF
condition, the source code from which the TC fact block had been produced was shown in
full, and the failure instruction was added because of the code-bearing scaffold. The rendered
fact block was copied verbatim from the TC packet, and equality was verified by per-round
SHA-256 audit. Thus, the TC–CF-SF transition added source code and the failure instruction
together while evidence was held fixed. This comparison is not interpreted as a code-only
effect.
The GR-SHAPE condition was constructed as a shape-matched placebo. In this arm, the
CF-SF source-code block was preserved exactly and verified by per-round SHA-256 equality.
The failure instruction, template, and bullet count were also held fixed. Executed facts were
replaced with bullets selected from a frozen list of generic requirement statements. Placebo
bullets were constructed so that they contained no function name, assert literal, or task
identifier, and an executable forbidden-token audit was applied to all rendered prompts.
Thus, in the CF-SF–GR-SHAPE contrast, source code, failure instruction, template, and
bullet count are held fixed while task-relevant fact content is changed. This comparison is
designed to separate the effect of executed counterevidence from the presence and shape
effects of generic companion text. Nevertheless, because exact token length and lexical
distribution are not fully equalized, it is not claimed that all surface-form differences are
removed.
It has been shown that meaning-preserving changes in prompt form can produce large
differences in accuracy (Sclar et al., 2024), and that arbitrary prompt architecture can bias
outputs independently of task content (Brucks & Toubia, 2025). Therefore, the placebo arm
is used as the load-bearing control for feedback-content attribution.
To test the code–instruction coupling in the main design, a preregistered sixth arm named
BI (blind plus instruction) was run as a sequential follow-up. BI was constructed by adding
only the failure instruction used in the code-bearing arms to the B scaffold. No code, facts,
or bullets were added. Four rounds were run on the same fixed and disjoint units, a separate
seed namespace was used, and outcomes were paired at the unit level with the frozen B
and P outcomes. Thus, the instruction component and the code-bearing-context component
were measured through separate contrasts. Code content and the intrinsic prompt length
introduced by code are not decomposed in this follow-up.
2.2 Statistical analysis, generation protocol, and disclosure
2.2.1 Preregistered statistical family
The frozen statistical family consisted of three one-sided claims evaluated on pooled
discordant pairs:
• C1
′ 
(co-primary, trap hypothesis): B > P.
• C2
′ 
(co-primary, antidote hypothesis): CF-SF > P.
9

Procedure 1 Five-arm evaluation procedure. The procedure is not a repair algorithm, but
an evaluation instrument that measures the arm-level true-unlock outcome for each dead
unit under a matched output-generation budget.
Input: Dead unit set U, arms A = {P, B, TC, CF-SF, GR-SHAPE}, rounds R = 4, frozen
packet renderer, frozen decoding parameters
Output: Per-unit and per-arm outcome unlock(u, a)
1: for all dead units u ∈ U do
2: for r = 1 to R do
3: retrieve the frozen round-r trajectory state for each arm
4: render π
u,P,r 
from the P failing incumbent
5: render π
u,B,r 
from the original task only
6: render π
u,TC,r 
from at most six violated public I/O facts
7: 
render π
u,CF-SF,r 
by copying the TC fact block and adding the source code on
which those facts were executed
8: render π
u,GR-SHAPE,r 
by copying the CF-SF code block and replacing the fact block
with count-matched placebo bullets
9: verify mirror SHA equality and run the forbidden-token audit
10: for all arms a ∈ A do
11: derive fresh seed s
u,a,r 
from the dedicated namespace
12: ˆc
u,a,r 
← decode(π
u,a,r 
, s
u,a,r 
)
13: execute ˆc
u,a,r 
on the public tier
14: if ˆc
u,a,r 
passes the public tier then
15: execute ˆc
u,a,r 
on the prompt-hidden tier
16: end if
17: record the candidate, scores and frozen transition state
18: end for
19: end for
20: for all arms a ∈ A do
21: unlock(u, a) ← 1[∃r ≤ R : ˆc
u,a,r 
passes both tiers]
22: end for
23: end for
• C3
′ 
(confirmatory secondary, content attribution): CF-SF > GR-SHAPE.
Each claim was evaluated using an exact one-sided McNemar test (Fagerland, Lydersen, &
Laake, 2013; McNemar, 1947). For the favored-only discordant count b
01 
and the reverse-only
count b
10
, the exact probability was computed as
p
exact 
=
b
01
+b
10
∑
k=b
01
(
b
01 
+ b
10
k
) 
( 
1
2
)
b
01
+b
10
. (2.1)
Here, b
01 
denotes units unlocked by the favored arm but not unlocked by the comparison
arm. b
10 
denotes units unlocked only by the comparison arm. Concordant pairs do not
contribute to the test statistic. Same-unit paired-binary evaluation allows the unique unlock
pattern of each contrast to be measured instead of an aggregate pass-rate difference.
Familywise error for the three p-values was controlled by Holm correction (Holm, 1979).
For ordered values p
(1) 
≤ · · · ≤ p
(m)
, the first threshold violation is defined as
k = min
{
i : p
(i) 
> 
0.05
m−i+1
}
. (2.2)
H
(1)
, . . . , H
(k−1) 
are rejected, and all hypotheses are rejected if no violation is found.
Here, m = 3 and the familywise significance level was fixed at 0.05.
Under the frozen statistical rule, a positive family verdict required both co-primary claims
to satisfy the Holm-adjusted p < 0.05 condition. If only one co-primary claim passed the
threshold, the verdict was defined as NOT-CERTIFIED with a named split, and partial
certification was not applied. Passing the threshold for C3
′ 
allowed the antidote result to
be described as “content-attributed.” Failure of C3
′ 
alone did not block the co-primary
statistical verdict.
10

The term “certified” was used only as the operational label of the pre-committed statistical
decision rule. Preregistration was internal and version-control-timestamped. No registered
report using OSF, AsPredicted, or in-principle acceptance was used. The statistical verdict
and audit verdict were kept separate. If the frozen audit rule produced a failure, the original
audit status was preserved as AUDIT-FAILURE even if the statistical thresholds had been
passed. The amended verdict computed after the dated amendment was reported separately,
and the original verdict was not deleted.
Each contrast was paired through immutable task–cell keys. The evaluator executable
asserted that the pooled n, b
01
, and b
10 
values were equal to the sums of the six per-cell
tables. This invariant was added after the pooling-collapse bug detected in the discovery
stage.
To make the effect direction visible beyond pooled counts, the Haldane–Anscombe-
smoothed pooled matched-pair odds ratio is reported as
̂
OR
pool 
=
∑
6
s=1 
b
01,s 
+ 0.5
∑
6
s=1 
b
10,s 
+ 0.5 
. (2.3)
Here, b
01,s 
and b
10,s 
are the favored- and reverse-direction discordant counts within
stratum s. This quantity is not a Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel (CMH) estimator. It is used as
a pooled discordant odds ratio for descriptive effect-size summary, together with per-cell
signs and guard checks.
Two additional preregistered descriptive guards are applied to constrain claim wording to
observed effects. The material-rescue guard requires the GR-SHAPE−P rescue to be less than
half of the CF-SF − P rescue for content-attributed wording. The observed deployment-harm
gate applies the condition
b
10
n 
≤ 0.02 (2.4)
separately to each co-primary contrast. This gate is based on observed reverse-harm
share. It does not provide a confidence bound, non-inferiority proof, or deployment safety
guarantee for the population-level harm rate. Therefore, the gate is interpreted only as a
preregistered wording constraint.
Power is computed before the run as exact-binomial conditional power based on discovery-
stage discordant counts:
1 − β = Pr[p
exact
(X, D − X) ≤ α
Holm
] , X ∼ Binomial(D, π), (2.5)
where D is the expected discordant-pair count, X is the favorable-direction discordant
count, and π is the favorable share. The conservative first-step Holm threshold α
Holm 
= 0.05/3
is used. Pre-run power is computed as 0.72 for C1
′
, using D ≈ 38 and π = 0.737. For
C2
′
, power is computed as 0.83, using D ≈ 36 and π = 0.75. Power drops to the 0.16–0.38
range at half the discovery effect. Therefore, it is pre-committed that a non-significant but
direction-preserving result is interpreted as “failed to confirm” rather than as “refuted.”
The comparison of whether the tested arms exceeded blind resampling is not included
in the frozen superiority family. Since equality or non-superiority cannot be certified as a
positive result in a one-sided superiority test, the blind-resampling bound is reported with
descriptive discordant counts.
2.2.2 Generation protocol and audit invariants
Generation parameters were frozen before the run, as shown in Table 5. Each gener-
ation used 1,024 completion tokens, a 4,096-token context, one candidate per round, and
temperature 0.8. Sampler settings were inherited unchanged from the discovery stage.
The in-run prompt-token guard capped prompts at 3,072 tokens. The pre-run preflight
excluded the unit whose round-0 prompt might exceed the effective 2,944-token bound. The
primary sample preserved the single inherited exclusion from the predecessor experiment,
and no additional unit was excluded during the current main run.
Each generation is seeded through a dedicated namespace:
s = sha256
(
antidote|⟨cell⟩|⟨task⟩|⟨arm⟩|⟨round⟩
) 
mod 2
32
. (2.6)
Bar-delimited fields keyed a single generation. The full seed payload was stored in each
record. An executable audit verified that the 7,000 payloads in the main five-arm run were
11

Table 5: Frozen experimental configuration. Decoding parameters, arm set, sample sizes, and seed
namespace were committed to version control before the main run began. The disjoint-60 sample
was used only for sensitivity analysis and was not included in the primary statistical family.
Parameter Value
Cells 6
Models deepseek-coder:1.3b
qwen2.5-coder:0.5b-instruct-fp16
qwen2.5-coder:1.5b
Benchmarks 2 (HumanEval+, MBPP+)
Rounds 4
Arms 5 (P, B, TC, CF-SF, GR-SHAPE)
n (fixed sample) 290
num_predict 1024 (protocol)
num_ctx 4096 (protocol)
Seed namespace antidote|
Total fixed-sample generations 290 × 5 × 4 = 5800
Disjoint-60 generations 60 × 5 × 4 = 1200
Main-run total generations 7000
Sixth-arm follow-up generations 1,400
unique and contained no foreign namespace prefix. A separate namespace was used for the
sixth-arm follow-up.
Generated candidate code was executed inside a sandbox with a 2 GiB address-space
limit. An exclusive serving lock restricted generation requests to a single job at a time and
reduced concurrent-serving interference.
The audit layer was implemented not as an implementation detail, but as the falsification
layer of the method. During the pre-run stage, per-cell render manifests, SHA-pinned
round-0 prompts, constraint-render audits, and model digests were committed to version
control. During evaluation, the following invariants were applied executably: transition
completeness, exactly 5 arms × 4 rounds × included units, mirror equality, per-round
source-code and constraint-block SHA equality, forbidden-token audit on all GR-SHAPE
prompts, seed uniqueness and namespace isolation, provenance-based anti-reuse checks
against discovery records, and the pooled-equals-cell-sum invariant.
The full implementation was gated before the first token was produced by a falsification
suite containing eight executable counterexamples. The suite covered mirror integrity,
seed isolation, sample identity, prompt-hidden-test isolation, and hostile-output resilience
conditions.
Under the frozen rule, any audit failure assigns the original verdict as AUDIT-FAILURE.
One audit episode was triggered during the main run and one during the sixth-arm follow-up.
Original verdicts, forensic analyses, dated amendments, and amended verdicts are reported
separately (§3.3, §3.2). Generation outputs, unit identities, and scores are not changed
during amendments. Thus, failures of the pipeline itself are not deleted post hoc, and the
claim-producing system is also subjected to critical testing.
2.2.3 Discovery and single-promotion rule
The promoted hypotheses were derived from a previously run preregistered family in
the same research program, named CONFIRM-TC. This family tested whether facts-only
conditioning (TC) exceeded bare code (P) and produced a mixed result. The first claim
passed the threshold with a +15 effect (Holm p = 0.0301). The corpse-mechanism claim
reversed with −3 (p = 0.78), and the family did not receive a positive verdict.
In the same run, two unplanned contrasts produced larger descriptive effects: B − P =
+18 (p = 0.0025) and CF-SF − P = +18 (p = 0.0020). Of the ten possible undirected
pairwise contrasts among the five arms, five were inspected. Under a worst-case Bonferroni
correction applied to all ten contrasts, the values would remain approximately 0.025 and
0.020. Nevertheless, these observations are not counted as confirmatory evidence and are
used only as screening signals that generate new hypotheses.
The promotion rule was fixed before the new run began. Each descriptive effect was
allowed to be promoted to a fresh preregistered family only once. Discovery outputs were
12

not re-included in the confirmation analysis. If the fresh test failed, second promotion was
prohibited. This rule was applied to prevent a failed family from being protected from
refutation through post hoc reinterpretation or repeated testing (Hofman et al., 2023; Mayo
& Spanos, 2006; Popper, 1959, 1963).
To keep the estimand on the same task population, task lists, cached pools, and incumbents
were preserved. Seeds and generated tokens were completely renewed. Therefore, the
procedure provided fresh-generation confirmation. It did not provide independent-unit or
independent-population replication.
2.3 Post-primary external-controller follow-up instruments
In addition to the primary preregistered pipeline, six external controllers that guide
the frozen small model at inference time on the search-bound stratum are evaluated as
prompt-only follow-up instruments. These instruments are not part of the primary frozen
evaluation pipeline, are not preregistered, and are not subjected to that pipeline’s audit
invariants. Their mechanisms are summarized here for method completeness, whereas their
results are reported in Table 15. Each controller is compared with blind resampling (B)
and its own content-free shape placebo under a matched output-generation budget (R=4).
The shared suffixes in the names refer to joint-embedding predictive architecture (JEPA)
and reinforcement learning (RL) components. The deployed arms are mostly deterministic
fixed-rule variants rather than learned controllers. The learned stack is deferred. Only
FJR-JEPA-RL deploys learned LinUCB selection online.
Below, the deployed mechanism of each controller is summarized in a compact mathemat-
ical form derived from the source code. Components that were designed but not run in this
study are marked as deferred. Common notation is defined as follows. A unit u = (b, m, τ )
denotes benchmark b, frozen model m, and task τ . Each arm runs R=4 rounds. The
incumbent c
u,r 
at round r is defined as the candidate with the highest public-pass count
up to that point. For public test j ∈ {1, . . . , J
u
}, with pass flag f
j 
∈ {0, 1}, the cached
incumbent’s public-pass fraction and the search-bound stratum are defined as
q
0
(u) = 
s
u
J
u
, S
SB 
= 
{ 
u : 
1
3 
≤ q
0
(u) < 1 
}
. (2.7)
Here, s
u 
= 
∑
j 
f
j 
is the number of passed public assertions. True unlock Y
a
(u) is defined
as at least one candidate generated under arm a passing both the public and prompt-hidden
tiers in a round (Definition 2). FJR-, RIFT-, and DCH-JEPA-RL share a falsification-severity
primitive:
σ(e) = T (e) · 1[e refutes h] · 
1 − p
1 + p 
, p = P (e | b). (2.8)
Here, e is an executed public counterexample. T (e) ∈ [0, 1] denotes the oracle-trust value
associated with the evidence kind. T (e) = 1.0 was used for public assertions, T (e) = 0.95 for
metamorphic evidence, and T (e) = 0 for model-generated evidence. p is the expectedness of
the evidence under the public background. Surprising refutations (p → 0) receive maximum
severity. All controllers operate on public-only state and read the hidden tier only during
final true-unlock scoring.
FJR-JEPA-RL. FJR-JEPA-RL (Falsification-JEPA Reinforced Resynthesis) is used as
a deployed learned controller. On public-only context x, one LinUCB ridge estimator is
maintained for each arm in the action set A = {B, CE, MR, SPEC, DIV} and updated with
the observed public reward r:
A
a 
← A
a 
+ xx
⊤
, b
a 
← b
a 
+ r x, 
ˆ
θ
a 
= A
−1
a 
b
a
. (2.9)
The per-round action is selected as the argmax of an additive score. Ties are resolved
with a deterministic sha256 tie-break:
Q(s, a) = w
q
[
V (F (z, a)) − V (z)
] 
+ α
√
x
⊤
A
−1
a 
x + η
̂
 ∆κ(a)
+ w
N 
N (a) − w
anc 
AnchorRisk(a) − w
C 
c(a). 
(2.10)
Here, F denotes the JEPA latent transition predictor, V the public-trained value proxy,
z the public-only latent state, and s the policy state. κ is the corroboration score.
̂
 ∆κ(a)
13

defines the expected one-step corroboration gain of action a through the severity in Eq. (2.8).
N denotes behavioural novelty, α the LinUCB exploration constant, and w
q 
, η, w
N 
, w
anc
, w
C
fixed score weights. The last two terms are anchoring-risk and compute-cost penalties. w
anc
corresponds to the rho field in the code. When the value head is unfit, V ≡ 0.5 is returned,
so the JEPA term is exactly 0 at cold start. The hidden-label value head is offline-only and
is not used in the online run.
RIFT-JEPA-RL. RIFT-JEPA-RL (Refutation-Inversion Falsification Thought loop) is
used as a deployed fixed-rule conservative gate. For ten symbolic assumption-inversion axes,
severity is aggregated per axis from fired refuters, and a conservative threshold rule is applied:
ρ
a 
= max
r: axis(r)=a
σ(e
r 
), a
⋆ 
= arg max
a
ρ
a
, fire a
⋆ 
⇐⇒ ρ
a
⋆ 
> δ, otherwise B. (2.11)
In the deployed M1 configuration, δ=0 is used. The recipe for a fired axis is produced by
closed-form inversion of the refuted claim: 
¯
H = H ⊕ flip(c
⋆
). The M2 path, which extends
the same gate to the form of a pessimistic Q
− 
= 
ˆ
Q − β σ
Q 
with learned advantage and
epistemic uncertainty, is left deferred.
DCH-JEPA-RL. DCH-JEPA-RL (Dialectical Counter-Hypothesis JEPA-RL) is defined
as a designed-only and unrealizable instrument. Falsified assumptions are designed to be
converted into a version-space bank H
t 
consisting of K competing counter-hypothesis cards
and are formulated to be updated by Popperian exponential elimination:
μ
t+1
(i) ∝ μ
t
(i) exp
(
−λ 
∑
e∈E
t
ℓ(H
i
, e)
)
, ℓ(H
i
, e) = T (e) 1[H
i
̸
 
|= e]. (2.12)
Action selection is defined by a pessimistic lower-confidence advantage computed through
an offline group-disjoint JEPA world model F
ψ 
and hidden-transfer value head V
ω 
:
Q
−
(s, a) = 
ˆ
Q(s, a) − β ˆσ
Q
(s, a),
a
t 
= arg max
a
LCB(a) if max
a 
LCB(a) > δ
t
, otherwise B. 
(2.13)
Here, LCB(a) =
̂
 ∆(a) − β U (a) is defined as the lower-confidence bound. λ is the
Popperian elimination temperature, β is the pessimism or lower-confidence coefficient, and U
is total epistemic uncertainty. ℓ is the per-card elimination penalty and is distinct from RIFT’s
ρ
a 
severity aggregate. This stack is not run. Because the required offline transition corpus is
not available on disk, the controller cannot be instantiated. Therefore, Eq. (2.12)–(2.13) is
classified entirely as designed-but-deferred.
ECK-JEPA-RL. ECK-JEPA-RL (Executable Constraint Kernel JEPA-RL) is used as a
deployed fixed-rule kernel. For a search-bound unit, the public assertions violated by the
incumbent are accepted as an executable constraint kernel K only when they can be safely
serialized into a Python literal and parsed with ast.parse:
fired(K) =
(
∃j : ¬f
j 
∧ serializeOK(j)
)
∧ astParse
(
block(K)
)
,
a
t 
=
{
ECK
2
, fired(K)
B, otherwise.
(2.14)
Failing witnesses are ranked with the fixed 7-axis severity w
⊤
ζ
j 
. Here, w =
(1, 0.8, 0.7, 0.6, 0.4, 0.3, 0.3) is fixed. This code-free interface corresponds to the TC arm.
The learned world-model/value/LCB stack is left deferred.
Self-repair pilot. The self-repair pilot is defined as an instrument with no learned
component. This instrument does not inject a new signal. The shared CONFIRM/antidote
arms, namely B, CF-SF, GR-SHAPE, and TC, are reapplied in a live-confirmed search-bound
sub-stratum. A unit is kept only if, when the cached incumbent is rerun, the public-pass
fraction still remains inside the band:
keep u ⇐⇒ m ∈ M ∧ 
1
3 
≤ ˆq
0
(u) < 1, ˆq
0
(u) = 
n
passed
n
total
. (2.15)
14

For each arm, true unlock Y
a
(u) and pooled count N
a 
= 
∑
u 
Y
a
(u) are computed.
Comparisons are made using the one-sided exact McNemar test in Eq. (2.1). In addition, a
50,000-replicate bootstrap risk-difference confidence interval clustered by (benchmark, task)
is used.
EOT-JEPA-RL. EOT-JEPA-RL (Execution-Outcome Trace JEPA-RL) is used as a
deployed fixed-rule outcome kernel. For each public test, the candidate’s observed value o
j
is compared with the expected value y
j 
, and a mechanical outcome trace is constructed:
δ
j 
= d(o
j 
, y
j 
) =









o
j 
− y
j 
, float (|o
j 
− y
j 
| ≤ atol
j 
⇒ pass)
(missing, extra, first_diff, ∆
len
), container
0, o
j 
= y
j
reprdiff(o
j 
, y
j 
), otherwise.
(2.16)
In the container case, the tuple returns the missing/extra/first_diff elements and the
length difference ∆
len 
= len(o
j 
) − len(y
j 
). atol
j 
denotes the per-test absolute tolerance, and
reprdiff denotes the difference at the repr-string level. Each failing outcome is scored with
fixed weights:
sev
j 
= w
crash
1[exception ∨ timeout] + w
type
1[type(o
j 
)̸ = type(y
j 
)]
+ w
small
1[small literal] + w
anchor
1[anchor]. 
(2.17)
Here, w = (4, 2, 1, 0.5) is used. sev
j 
is an EOT-local score independent of the σ primitive
in Eq. (2.8). The type term is evaluated only when an observed value is available. The most
severe k
F 
=3 failures (F
t
) and k
A
=2 anchors (A
t
) form a kernel. The deployed NOLEARN
rule is
a
t 
=





EXC, |F
t
| > 0 ∧ n
exc
/|F
t
| ≥ 
1
2
OBS_ANCHOR, A
t
̸
 
= ∅
OBS, otherwise,
a
t 
= B if fire(K
t
) = 0. (2.18)
The rationale for EOT is defined as a placebo-distinctness hypothesis. According to
this hypothesis, the observed content O carries repair-class information beyond the shape
summary S(O), whereas the content-free placebo does not:
I(C
u
; O | x, S(O)) > 0 and I(C
u
; O
shape 
| x, S(O)) = 0.
This statement is used not as proof, but as a falsifiable hypothesis. The learned LCB/JEPA
policy is left deferred.
Each of these instruments is paired with its own content-free shape placebo: FJR-SHAPE,
RIFT-SHAPE, ECK-SHAPE, GR-SHAPE and EOT-SHAPE. For EOT, an additional EOT-
DECOY control that corrupts the observed value is used. The corresponding verdicts are
reported in Table 15.
3 Results
The experiments were conducted on HumanEval+ and MBPP+ dead task–cell units
using three frozen open-weight code models served through Ollama (qwen2.5-coder:1.5b,
qwen2.5-coder:0.5b-instruct, and deepseek-coder:1.3b). Each unit was evaluated
under five regeneration arms with the same output-generation budget. Four rounds were run
for each arm, and one candidate was generated in each round. Candidates were first scored by
execution against the public test tier and, if this tier was passed, against the prompt-hidden
EvalPlus tier. True unlock was defined as at least one candidate generated under the same
arm passing both tiers together (Definition 2). Primary analyses were performed on the
fixed sample of n = 290. Sensitivity analyses were conducted on 60 disjoint units that did
not overlap with the primary sample.
The main five-arm run was conducted on 350 units, formed by the union of the 290
primary units and 60 disjoint units. In total, 350 units × 5 arms × 4 rounds produced
7,000 generations, and 1,750 transition files were recorded. The primary statistical family is
15

Table 6: Preregistered family on n = 290 dead units. Pooled exact one-sided McNemar tests were
evaluated within a three-claim Holm family. b
01 
denotes units unlocked only by the favored arm.
b
10 
denotes units unlocked only by the comparison arm. Net effect was computed as b
01 
− b
10
. The
share column reports b
01
/(b
01 
+ b
10
) with the exact Clopper–Pearson 95% interval. The final column
reports the Haldane–Anscombe-smoothed pooled matched-pair odds ratio.
Contrast b
01 
b
10 
Net p (raw) p (Holm) Verdict Share [95% CI]
̂
 OR
pool
C1
′ 
B > P 25 7 +18 0.001051 0.002102 PASS 0.78 [0.60, 0.91] 3.40
C2
′ 
CF-SF > P 21 3 +18 0.0001386 0.0004157 PASS 0.88 [0.68, 0.97] 6.14
C3
′ 
CF-SF > GR-SHAPE 22 7 +15 0.004065 0.004065 PASS 0.76 [0.56, 0.90] 3.00
4 2 0 2 4
Net (McNemar b01-b10)
HE+ / qwen-1.5b
MBPP+ / qwen-1.5b
HE+ / qwen-0.5b-inst
MBPP+ / qwen-0.5b-inst
HE+ / deepseek-1.3b
MBPP+ / deepseek-1.3b
+2
+2
+2
+4
+4
+4
C1' B > P
6 4 2 0 2 4 6
Net (McNemar b01-b10)
+1
+5
+5
+1
+2
+4
C2' CF-SF > P
6 4 2 0 2 4 6
Net (McNemar b01-b10)
-1
+4
+5
+2
+0
+5
C3' CF-SF > GR-SHAPE
Per-cell net effects (6 cells each)
Figure 2: Per-cell net discordant effects for the three family claims across the six benchmark×model
cells. The dashed line denotes zero. C1
′ 
and C2
′ 
are in the positive direction in all six cells. C3
′ 
is
positive in four of six cells, with a worst cell of −1.
based on 5,800 generations from the fixed sample. The remaining 1,200 generations were
produced for the disjoint sensitivity sample. An additional 1,400 fresh generations were
obtained in the preregistered sixth-arm follow-up. All pre-run manifests were committed
before generation began. The anti-reuse audit episode triggered in the main run is reported
in §3.3, and the lookup-scope episode identified during the sixth-arm follow-up is reported in
§3.2. Generation outputs, unit identities, and scores were not changed during amendments.
Original and amended audit verdicts were preserved separately. Unless the disjoint sample is
explicitly specified, the findings below are reported on the fixed sample of n = 290.
3.1 Primary effects and observed blind baseline
All three preregistered claims passed the frozen statistical thresholds (Table 6 and
Figure 2). For the trap hypothesis C1
′
, blind resampling unlocked 25 units that were not
unlocked by the bare-code arm. Seven units were observed in the reverse direction. Thus,
a +18 net effect was obtained in favor of blind resampling (exact one-sided p = 0.00105,
Holm-adjusted p = 0.0021).
For the antidote hypothesis C2
′
, a 21/3 discordant split and a +18 net effect were obtained
in favor of the code-plus-facts packet (p = 0.000139, Holm-adjusted p = 0.00042). Because
the two arms followed independent trajectories, this comparison is reported as an arm-level
packet effect rather than as a same-source-code fact-addition effect.
For the content-attribution claim C3
′
, a 22/7 discordant split and a +15 net effect
were observed (Holm-adjusted p = 0.0041). In this mirror comparison, source code, failure
instruction, template, and bullet count were held fixed, while the fact block was changed
between task-relevant facts and generic bullets. Because exact token length and lexical
distribution were not equalized, this contrast is reported only as content-favoring component-
level evidence under the matched dimensions. Under the frozen statistical decision rule,
the family label was assigned as CERTIFIED, content-attributed. The audit verdict is
reported separately from the statistical label in §3.3.
The smoothed pooled matched-pair odds ratios computed with Equation (2.3) were 3.4 for
C1
′
, 6.1 for C2
′
, and 3.0 for C3
′
. The direction of the co-primary effects was preserved in all
16

B P (trap) CF-SF P (antidote)
0
5
10
15
20
Net effect (b01
 
b10)
+18
28/10
+18
25/7
+18
27/9
+18
21/3
Net effect reproduces at +18 on 100% fresh generations
Discovery (CONFIRM)
Confirmation (ANTIDOTE)
Figure 3: Discovery and fresh-generation confirmation. Descriptive contrasts observed with
discovery seeds and preregistered estimates obtained with 100% fresh confirmation seeds are shown
on the same n = 290 units. Net effects were reproduced as +18 for both contrasts, although
discordant compositions changed.
six cells. The preregistered cell guard was defined for C1
′ 
and C2
′ 
in each benchmark×model
cell by the following predicate: a cell fails the guard if the net discordant difference is ≤ −2
or if the one-sided binomial p < 0.05 in the base-only harm direction. No cell triggered this
guard. This result indicates that no conflict was found between the pooled direction and
the cell-level signs. It does not imply that cell-level effect magnitudes were homogeneous or
precisely estimated.
Discovery-stage contrasts were reproduced with the same net magnitude on 100% fresh
seeds and fresh generations. In the discovery run, B − P = +18 and CF-SF − P = +18 were
observed. In the confirmation run, +18 was again obtained for both contrasts (Figure 3).
However, discordant compositions changed from 28/10 to 25/7 for the trap contrast and from
27/9 to 21/3 for the antidote contrast. Thus, fresh-generation confirmation shows net-effect
agreement on the same fixed sample, not reproduction of individual task outcomes (Gorman
& Bedrick, 2019).
The arm-level performance profile was summarized by pooled true-unlock counts (Figure 4
and Table 8). Blind resampling (B) and code-plus-facts (CF-SF) produced 26 unlocks each.
Facts only (TC) produced 15, placebo (GR-SHAPE) produced 11, and bare code (P) produced
8 unlocks. The observed ordering was
B = 26 = CF-SF > TC = 15 > GR-SHAPE = 11 > P = 8.
The corresponding true-unlock rates were 9.0% for B and CF-SF, 5.2% for TC, 3.8% for
GR-SHAPE, and 2.8% for P. These marginal counts summarize the general arm profile and
are not used as substitutes for paired discordant contrasts.
The generation-level public-pass profile was broadly consistent with the same ordering
(Table 7). Of the 1,160 candidates generated per arm, 4.0% passed the public tier under
CF-SF, 3.9% under B, 2.3% under TC, 1.9% under GR-SHAPE, and 1.8% under P.
Public-to-true conversion was 26/42 = 61.9% for B, 26/35 = 74.3% for CF-SF, and
8/13 = 61.5% for P. Thus, although fewer units passed the public tier under CF-SF than
17

Table 7: Per-arm generation profile on the fixed sample (n = 290 units and 1,160 generations
per arm). Prompt length is the cell-size-weighted pooled mean. Public-pass rate is reported as a
generation-level proportion. Public and true unlocks are unit counts. The final column reports the
first true-unlock round.
Arm Mean prompt chars Pass rate (%) Pub unlocks True unlocks (% of 290) Rounds r1/r2/r3/r4
P 1289.9 1.8 13 8 (2.8) 2/3/2/1
B 406.4 3.9 42 26 (9.0) 4/4/7/11
TC 655.3 2.3 23 15 (5.2) 2/5/3/5
CF-SF 1482.9 4.0 35 26 (9.0) 7/10/4/5
GR-SHAPE 1475.9 1.9 15 11 (3.8) 3/4/3/1
P B TC CF-SF GR-SHAPE
Arm
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
TRUE unlocks
8
26
15
26
11
Pooled TRUE unlocks per arm (n=290 dead tasks)
Figure 4: Pooled true unlocks across 290 dead units. Blind resampling (B) and code-plus-facts
(CF-SF) tied with 26 unlocks. Facts only (TC) produced 15, placebo (GR-SHAPE) produced 11, and
bare code (P) produced 8 unlocks.
Table 8: Per-cell true unlocks by arm and per-cell net discordants for the three family claims. The
pooled row is exactly equal to the sums of the cell-level columns. The pooled-equals-cell-sum audit
invariant was satisfied with zero mismatch.
Cell n P B TC CF-SF GR-SHAPE C1
′ 
C2
′ 
C3
′
HE+ / qwen-1.5b 24 2 4 1 3 4 +2 +1 −1
MBPP+ / qwen-1.5b 47 1 3 2 6 2 +2 +5 +4
HE+ / qwen-0.5b-inst 40 2 4 3 7 2 +2 +5 +5
MBPP+ / qwen-0.5b-inst 60 1 5 2 2 0 +4 +1 +2
HE+ / deepseek-1.3b 59 0 4 6 2 2 +4 +2 0
MBPP+ / deepseek-1.3b 60 2 6 1 6 1 +4 +4 +5
under B, the true-unlock count preserved on the prompt-hidden tier was the same for the
two arms.
First true unlocks were distributed across all four rounds. Round counts were 7/10/4/5
under CF-SF and 4/4/7/11 under B. Because per-round success rates were low and counts
were limited, these profiles are reported descriptively.
In the observed comparison with blind resampling, the code-plus-facts arm tied at the
pooled level. Both arms unlocked 26 of the 290 units. However, the unlocked unit sets were
not the same. A symmetric 20/20 discordant split was observed for the CF-SF-only and
18

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
B (blind resample) unlocks
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
CF-SF unlocks
HE+ / qwen-1.5b
MBPP+ / qwen-1.5b
HE+ / qwen-0.5b-inst
MBPP+ / qwen-0.5b-inst
HE+ / deepseek-1.3b
MBPP+ / deepseek-1.3b
Discordant split
CF-SF only b01=20
B only b10=20
pooled 20/20 cells on diagonal
CF-SF B = 0: blind ceiling replicates (20/20 discordant split)
Figure 5: Observed comparison with blind resampling. Per-cell true-unlock counts for CF-SF and B
are heterogeneous around the identity line. Pooled over all cells, the two arms tied with 26 unlocks
and produced a symmetric 20/20 discordant split. This result does not imply equivalence.
B-only directions (Figure 5). Thus, the observed pooled difference was zero, but unit-level
agreement was not obtained.
This result does not show equivalence, population-level non-inferiority, or identical
behavior. It only shows that the pooled net difference was zero under the current sample
and output-generation budget.
Per-cell counts were heterogeneous. Blind resampling exceeded code-plus-facts by 1, 2,
and 3 unlocks in three cells. Code-plus-facts exceeded blind resampling by 3 unlocks in two
cells, and one cell tied. Thus, cell-level differences cancelled within the pooled average.
The facts-only arm also remained below blind resampling: TC − B = −11 was obtained
(12/23, descriptive one-sided p = 0.98). This descriptive comparison shows that facts-only
conditioning did not produce additional pooled gain over blind resampling in the tested
setting.
3.2 Attribution and sensitivity analyses
In the main trap comparison, failing code, failure instruction, and prompt length changed
together. To test the independent contribution of the failure instruction, a sixth arm, BI
(blind plus instruction), was run under a separate frozen preregistration. BI was constructed
by adding only the failure instruction used in P to the B scaffold. No code, facts, or bullets
were added. Mean prompt length was 406 characters for B, 478 for BI, and 1,290 for P.
BI was run for four rounds on the same 350 units, producing 1,400 fresh generations
under a dedicated namespace. Outcomes were paired at the unit level with the B and P
outcomes frozen from the main run. Equality audits were applied to model digests, decoding
parameters, and unit lists. The net-count decomposition was
19

Table 9: Standing descriptives and preregistered wording guards (n = 290 fixed sample). Descriptive
rows are not included in the certified family. The blind-resampling row shows the observed pooled
tie. The material-rescue guard compares placebo rescue with one half of antidote recovery. The
observed-harm gate is a point-estimate wording rule applying the b
10
/n ≤ 0.02 threshold and does
not provide a safety proof or probabilistic guarantee.
Item b
01 
b
10 
Net p (raw) Verdict
CF-SF − B (observed pooled tie) 20 20 0 0.5627 –
TC − B 12 23 −11 0.9795 –
GR-SHAPE − P 11 8 +3 0.3238 –
Rescue guard: GR-SHAPE-P vs (CF-SF-P)/2 – – +3 vs 9 – PASS
Deployment gate C1’ – 7 7/290 0.0241 FAIL
Deployment gate C2’ – 3 3/290 0.0103 PASS
Table 10: Sixth-arm family on the same n = 290 units. Pooled exact one-sided McNemar tests
were evaluated within a two-claim Holm family. BI generations are fresh, whereas B and P outcomes
are frozen from the main run. By construction, the net differences sum to +3 + 15 = +18.
Contrast b
01 
b
10 
Net p (raw) p (Holm) Verdict Share [95% CI]
̂
 OR
pool
D1
′ 
B > BI 18 15 +3 0.3642 0.3642 FAIL 0.55 [0.36, 0.72] 1.19
D2
′ 
BI > P 19 4 +15 0.0013 0.002599 PASS 0.83 [0.61, 0.95] 4.33
(B − BI) + (BI − P) = (B − P) = +18.
This equality is reported not as a substantive finding, but as an algebraic bookkeeping
identity showing that the decomposition was correctly constructed on the same units.
No statistically detectable effect was found for the failure instruction. B exceeded BI
by +3 (D1
′
: 18/15, p = 0.36). This result does not prove that the failure instruction has
no effect. It only shows that no detectable instruction-only effect was observed under the
current sample and design.
BI exceeded P by +15 (D2
′
: 19/4, Holm-adjusted p = 0.0026). The direction was positive
in all six cells, and the smoothed pooled matched-pair odds ratio was computed as 4.33. BI
produced 23 total true unlocks and fell between B and P in the pooled ordering.
The preregistered diagnostic follow-up did not detect a statistically distinguishable
instruction-only effect in this sample. The BI–P contrast is reported as the observed diagnostic
difference between the code-bearing P arm and the code-free instruction arm. Because code
content remained confounded with additional prompt length, no pure code-content causation
claim is made (§4.2). In this follow-up, only BI generations were freshly produced, whereas B
and P outcomes were reused in frozen form from the main run. Therefore, this analysis is a
diagnostic decomposition of the bare-code contrast, not a fully fresh three-arm confirmatory
experiment.
The main and follow-up families were evaluated under separate Holm corrections. When
a conservative Bonferroni correction was applied to all five confirmatory tests across the
two families, C1
′
, C2
′
, C3
′
, and D2
′ 
remained significant, whereas the intended-null D1
′
remained non-significant.
In the content-attribution and sensitivity analysis, the CF-SF–GR-SHAPE mirror contrast
used the same source code, failure instruction, template, and bullet count. Executed facts were
replaced with generic requirement bullets. On the primary sample, CF-SF−GR-SHAPE = +15
was obtained (Holm-adjusted p = 0.0041). The descriptive rescue of the placebo over the
bare-code arm was +3 (11/8, p = 0.32). This value was below the preregistered material-
rescue threshold of +9. This result shows that observed recovery on the primary sample
was in the direction of task-relevant fact content under the matched dimensions. Because
exact token length and lexical distribution were not equalized, attribution is limited to the
matched dimensions defined in the Methods section.
The empty-fact exposure audit showed that, for TC and CF-SF in the primary sample,
round-0 per-unit fact counts were distributed between 1 and 6, and that all 290 units received
at least one genuine executed fact at round-0 entry (Table 11). The rendered violation block
is round-specific and is derived from the incumbent trajectory of each round. Per-round
20

Table 11: Empty-fact exposure. Round-0 rendered violation fact counts for the facts-only (TC)
and code-plus-facts (CF-SF) arms across the 290 primary units. The rendered violation block is
round-specific, derived from each round’s incumbent trajectory. Per-round SHA-256 equality holds
across all four rounds for 250 of 290 units and varies for the remaining 40 (Round-identical column).
No primary unit received zero facts at round-0 entry, although a later round may render zero facts
once a candidate stops violating the public tier.
Arm 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 Zero-fact Round-identical
TC 0 43 44 122 23 15 43 0 (0.0%) 250/290
CF-SF 0 43 44 122 23 15 43 0 (0.0%) 250/290
SHA-256 equality was preserved across all four rounds for 250 of the 290 units and varied
for the remaining 40 units. Because no unit received a zero-fact prompt at round-0 entry,
the post hoc C3
′ 
sensitivity on units receiving at least one genuine fact is identical to the
primary C3
′ 
sample. This analysis is post hoc and does not generate a new confirmatory
claim.
The disjoint 60-unit sensitivity sample produced a weaker and mixed pattern. Co-primary
directions were preserved, but net magnitudes fell to +1. For C1
′
, a 2/1 discordant split was
observed, and for C2
′
, a 3/2 discordant split was observed. The content-attribution contrast
reversed with −2 (1/3).
On the same sample, sixth-arm comparisons produced +4 (6/2) for the code-bearing-
context component and −3 (2/5) for the instruction comparison. The disjoint sample was
small, drawn by seeded random sampling from unselected eligible units separate from the
primary sample, and underpowered by design. It is therefore not interpreted as independent
confirmation. The direction change in C3
′ 
is nevertheless recorded as a sensitivity result.
The observed-harm gate was applied separately to the two co-primary comparisons. For
C2
′
, the reverse-harm share was
3/290 = 0.0103 ≤ 0.02.
For C1
′
, it was
7/290 = 0.0241 > 0.02.
Accordingly, the preregistered wording rule permitted bounded wording for the code-
plus-facts packet relative to the bare-code packet. Wording that universally prefers blind
resampling to bare-code retry was not supported.
This gate is based on a point estimate. It does not provide a confidence bound showing
that the population-level harm rate is below 2%, nor does it provide a non-inferiority result
or a deployment safety guarantee. Practical wording is limited to the tested sample, observed
contrasts, and preregistered threshold.
Because the same benchmark task could appear in multiple model cells, a post hoc
clustered sensitivity analysis was conducted on the primary sample. This analysis does not
modify the preregistered exact McNemar family and does not define a new confirmatory
family. The cluster key was taken as benchmark|task, and the model was not included in the
cluster key. Thus, observations of the same task under different models were kept within the
same cluster, and the 290 primary units corresponded to 202 task clusters. This valid count
of 202 task clusters is numerically identical to, but conceptually different from, the erroneous
202-row key collapse reported in the audit trail, where 290 units were merged across cells by
bare task keys.
For each contrast, the paired absolute risk difference was computed in percentage points.
Benchmark composition was preserved by resampling clusters within benchmark, and a
50,000-replicate cluster bootstrap was used to produce percentile 95% confidence intervals
(CIs), with deterministic seed sha256(task-cluster-bootstrap-v1). Results are given in
Table 12. The 95% CIs for the B−P, CF-SF−P, and CF-SF−GR-SHAPE contrasts excluded
zero. The interval for the CF-SF−B (blind) contrast included zero. Because discordant pairs
did not cluster jointly across model cells, the clustered intervals resembled the unit-level
pattern and did not change the qualitative ordering of the four contrasts. Since this analysis
is post hoc, it does not re-establish the nominal error rate of the preregistered tests.
21

Table 12: Post hoc task-cluster sensitivity analysis (does not modify the preregistered fam-
ily). Cluster key: benchmark|task. 50,000 cluster-bootstrap replicates were resampled within
benchmark. Deterministic seed: sha256(task-cluster-bootstrap-v1). Risk difference is re-
ported in percentage points. Values were computed from committed primary result manifests
using analysis/task_cluster_effects.py and independently verified as float-identical using
analysis/verify_clustered_effects.py.
Contrast Net RD (pp) 95% cluster CI
B − P +18 +6.21 [+2.48, +10.00]
CF-SF − P +18 +6.21 [+3.06, +9.57]
CF-SF − GR-SHAPE +15 +5.17 [+1.68, +8.81]
CF-SF − B +0 +0.00 [−4.40, +4.39]
In a post hoc q
0 
stratification, the dead pool was divided into four bins according to q
0
,
the ratio of the number of public assertions passed by the cached incumbent to the total
number of public assertions: q
0
=0 (n=159), 0<q
0
<1/3 (n=22), 1/3≤q
0
<2/3 (n=51), and
2/3≤q
0
<1 (n=58). The total remained n = 290. This stratification was not preregistered
and does not generate a new confirmatory claim. In the q
0
=0 stratum, the descriptive
difference between CF-SF and B was −8. Discordant counts are available in the committed
manifests. In the search-bound stratum (1/3≤q
0
<1, n=109), the cached CF-SF−B difference
was +10 (p=0.0154). The prospective test of this post hoc discovery slice is reported in §4.1.
These values were derived from committed result manifests, and no generation output or
score was changed.
3.3 Audit outcomes
The sixth-arm evaluator initially produced AUDIT-FAILURE. A total of 120 missing-
baseline errors corresponded to the crossing of 60 disjoint units with two baseline arms.
Before any code change was made, the forensic audit showed that baseline records were
present but that the loader read only the fixed-sample collection. A dated amendment
expanded the lookup scope and preserved the fatal predicate for genuinely absent units. The
amendment was gated by two executable counterexamples requiring that the disjoint baseline
be resolved and that an intentionally deleted baseline produce a fatal failure. Original and
amended verdicts were reported together.
The as-frozen evaluator for the main run initially produced AUDIT-FAILURE. The
anti-reuse invariant defined to detect accidental reuse of discovery outputs was triggered on
28 distinct (output SHA-256, prompt SHA-256) pairs that were also present in discovery
records. These pairs were observed in a total of 34 confirmation records.
Before any code change was made, the forensic audit found no seed-payload collision.
Records with output equality had distinct namespaces and distinct seeds. Prompt equality
was confirmed to be expected by design. Because the same task lists, cached pools, and
incumbents were preserved, some round-0 prompts were byte-identical. Collision incidence
was 34 records out of 7,000, approximately 0.5%.
The arm distribution of colliding records was P = 17, CF-SF = 15, TC = 2, B = 0, and
GR-SHAPE = 0. This distribution was reported descriptively and was not used for causal or
directional interpretation. Because provenance records were distinct, output-hash equality
alone was not accepted as evidence of cross-run reuse.
With the dated amendment, output-hash equality under intentionally identical prompts
was removed as a fatal predicate and retained as a counted diagnostic. Seed-payload collision,
namespace reuse, and provenance inconsistency were retained as fatal predicates.
The amendment was gated by five executable checks, including a counterexample requiring
that a doctored seed-copy remain a fatal failure and a full real-data re-evaluation. The
official amended verdict was computed only after all checks had been completed. Generation
data, outputs, and scores were not changed. Thus, the assumptions of the evaluation pipeline
itself were also left open to executable criticism, and the original failure was not removed
post hoc from the record.
22

Table 13: Verdict status by layer. Statistical verdicts and audit verdicts are reported separately.
Original as-frozen AUDIT-FAILURE statuses are preserved. Dated amendments do not have the
same evidential weight as untouched preregistration.
Layer As-frozen sta-
tus
Forensic finding Dated amend-
ment
Post-
amendment
status
Primary statisti-
cal family (C1
′
,
C2
′
, C3
′
)
CERTIFIED Co-primary direction
held in all six cells.
No cell guard trig-
gered
None required CERTIFIED
(preregistered
exact McNe-
mar)
Main-run audit AUDIT-
FAILURE
Anti-reuse invariant
fired on 34 records
/ 28 distinct (output,
prompt) SHA pairs.
Forensic audit found
zero seed-payload col-
lision
Output-pair
predicate
reclassified
as diagnostic.
Seed-payload
collision kept
fatal
CERTIFIED
(suite 5/5)
Diagnostic follow-
up (statistical)
CERTIFIED 
D1
′ 
instruction-only
+3, p = 0.36. D2
′
+15, p = 0.0026
None required CERTIFIED
(two-claim
Holm)
Diagnostic follow-
up (audit)
AUDIT-
FAILURE
120 missing-baseline
errors (loader read
only the fixed-sample
collection)
Lookup
widened;
missing-
baseline kept
fatal for gen-
uinely absent
units
CERTIFIED
(two added
counterexam-
ples)
4 Discussion
The results obtained in this study answer a narrower and more fundamental question
than the extent to which self-repair feedback is useful for small frozen code models: which
kind of information inside the feedback packet carries operational signal, and whether that
signal produces value beyond blind resampling. Three main patterns emerged jointly. First,
the bare-code retry arm remained below blind resampling. Second, the code-plus-facts packet
recovered the bare-code deficit at the pooled level, and the same-code placebo contrast
favored task-relevant fact content on the primary sample. Third, this recovery did not exceed
blind resampling, and code-plus-facts and blind resampling produced zero observed pooled
difference in the tested sample. Therefore, in the tested regime, the observed function of
feedback design was not to produce additional pooled unlocks over blind resampling, but to
close the pooled unlock deficit induced by the code-bearing packet.
This pattern shows that self-repair cannot be interpreted simply as “the model can correct
itself if it sees its own error.” Re-showing bare failing code does not provide new external
information about the candidate program. Instead, the previous failed solution is moved back
into the conditioning context. This operation may pull the model’s sampling distribution
toward the local trajectory of the failed solution and may narrow the exploration of the
alternative solution space. The preregistered sixth-arm follow-up narrows this interpretation.
Adding the failure instruction without code did not produce a statistically detectable
difference. The remaining difference was associated with code-bearing context. However,
because code content was not separated from intrinsic prompt length, it is not claimed that
failing code alone produced harm. The more limited inference supported by the data is that
the bare code-bearing packet produced lower outcomes than blind resampling and that this
difference was not explained by an instruction-only manipulation.
One plausible explanation for this pattern is anchoring. A concrete but wrong artifact
may pull the generation distribution toward the local neighborhood of the failed solution.
Concrete references have long been known to produce anchoring in human judgment (Tversky
& Kahneman, 1974). In code models, buggy context has been shown to reduce pass rates
(Dinh et al., 2023), and a related-but-wrong function has been shown to anchor generated
23

outputs in a way that cannot be explained only by verbatim copying (Jones & Steinhardt,
2022). Self-preference effects observed in large language model (LLM) evaluators are also
consistent with the possibility that a model may assign disproportionate weight to its own
outputs (Panickssery, Bowman, & Feng, 2024). Nevertheless, the present experiment does not
measure token-level or activation-level mechanisms. Irrelevant-context distraction, effective-
attention reduction, prompt-length burden, and trajectory persistence could produce the
same arm-level pattern. Anchoring is therefore presented not as a confirmed mechanism, but
as a parsimonious explanation consistent with the measured contrasts.
Executed facts have a different epistemic status. Violation facts are derived not from the
model’s verbal self-critique or from its introspective judgment about its own program, but
from the execution of candidate code on public tests. Thus, checker-grounded information,
rather than a model-internal assertion, is added to the feedback packet (Huang et al., 2024;
Olausson et al., 2024). It has also been reported that verified test-case content can be useful
for code generation (Rizqullah & Albassam, 2026) and that usefulness is associated more with
verification status than with mere text presence (Zhang, Wang, Xia, Wang, & Li, 2023). The
same-code placebo contrast on the primary sample supports this distinction as well. Executed
facts produce higher outcomes than generic companion text. The safest interpretation of this
result is that the recovery is not explained only by template, bullet count, or companion-text
presence. Rather, under the matched dimensions, recovery is associated with task-relevant
and execution-grounded content. Because exact lexical distribution and token length are not
equalized, all surface-form explanations are not ruled out. In addition, the direction change of
the content-attribution contrast in the disjoint sensitivity sample limits the external stability
of this interpretation.
This distinction carries a direct philosophical consequence for self-repair in LLMs. The
production of a new natural-language critique by an LLM about its own output does not
by itself imply that a strong Popperian refutation has been produced. Such a critique may
be another text artifact generated from the linguistic distribution of the same model. By
contrast, an execution-derived violation is an external comparison that tests the behavioral
claim of the program under an oracle independent of the model. In this study, the generated
program is treated as a tentative conjecture, and the executed test violation is treated as an
oracle-relative and executable counterexample that refutes a specific behavioral consequence
of that conjecture (Popper, 1959, 1963). The useful signal is obtained not from the model’s
use of Popperian vocabulary, not from the model’s verbal critique of its own output, and
not from re-exposure to failing code, but from comparing the conjecture with failure facts
revealed by execution. Thus, in the tested regime, falsification functions not as exposure, but
as execution-grounded criticism.
At the same time, the Popperian framing should not be interpreted here as an instruction
that improves model reasoning through vocabulary alone. The observed effect belongs to
executed facts. The Popperian contribution appears more at the level of measurement
architecture. Hypotheses are bounded in advance, the verdict implied by unfavorable
outcomes is specified, discovery outputs are not reused as confirmation evidence, and the
evaluation pipeline itself is kept open to executable audit invariants. In this sense, the
Popperian method functions not as a reasoning capability possessed by the model, but as a
critical-control discipline applied to model outputs and to the researcher claims produced
about those outputs. The methodological originality lies precisely in this point. Not only
the program conjecture, but also the researcher conjecture that feedback content is useful,
is made falsifiable through placebo controls, a matched-budget baseline, fresh-generation
confirmation, and audit counterexamples.
This two-level structure has direct consequences for LLM evaluation studies. Since
LLM outputs are stochastic, prompt-sensitive, and sensitive to surface form, apparent
improvement may often arise not from content but from prompt length, template, formatting,
retry instruction, or an additional sampling opportunity. Therefore, the apparent success
of a feedback mechanism does not show that it carries epistemically meaningful content.
Falsification is not reduced here to the question of whether the model’s answer passed the
test. The questions of which component the improvement can be attributed to, and under
which counterfactual controls the researcher’s attribution claim survives, are also made
part of the measurement. For this reason, packet decomposition, placebo mirroring, and
matched output-generation budget are not merely engineering controls. They function as
24

methodological falsification tools that reduce the distance between claim and evidence in
LLM evaluation.
The observed comparison with blind resampling further bounds this interpretation. Code-
plus-facts and blind resampling reached the same pooled unlock total, but they succeeded
on different units. The observed tie showed zero observed pooled difference in the tested
sample. It does not imply equivalence, population-level non-inferiority, or identical behavior.
Nevertheless, none of the tested feedback arms exceeded blind resampling under the current
sample and matched output-generation budget. Code-plus-facts closed the pooled unlock
deficit relative to the bare-code packet, but did not produce additional pooled gain over
blind resampling. This result shows that improvement over the previous completion does
not imply superiority over fresh sampling under the same budget.
In the dead-task regime, the experiment directly measured outcome differences between
conditioning packets. By contrast, the latent generative mechanism that produces these
differences was not identified. In the present design, the tested feedback packets did not
produce observed pooled superiority over blind resampling (Brown et al., 2024; Snell et
al., 2025). This result makes no claim about the model distribution or latent support.
Whether correct programs exist within the same model distribution, or which arms would
have an advantage under larger sampling budgets, is not the estimand of this study. What is
measured is the paired effect of specific feedback packets on observed true-unlock outcomes
under a finite zero-pass-in-pool regime and a fixed output-generation budget.
This finding has a broader methodological implication for how inference-time improvement
claims should be evaluated. Methods that exceed a blind baseline may need to modify the
search or generation process more substantively, rather than merely reconditioning on a
spent candidate. Search over diverse plans (E. Wang et al., 2025), functional decomposition
(J. Chen et al., 2024), decoding guidance with live execution traces (Lavon, Katz, & Wolf,
2025), and inference-aware retraining (Chow et al., 2025) are examples in this direction.
However, prompt-only variants of this class are prospectively tested on the search-bound
stratum and remain null (Table 15). Therefore, under the current evidence, the operational
implication is that every richer feedback claim should be evaluated against blind resampling
under an equal output-generation budget before it is advanced.
When read together with the previous two stages of the falsification-centered measurement
program, a broader signal boundary emerges. In the first stage of the program, Popperian
procedural content was shown not to provide a separable execution-correctness contribution
over a labels-only scaffold, and the measured improvement was associated with scaffold
structure (İşcan, 2026a). In the same study, a same-model Popperian self-judge did not
exceed random selection. In the second stage of the program, semantic post-hoc falsification
operators, including selection, verification, repair, elimination, and generation conditioning,
were compared against Best-of-N under a deterministic execution oracle and a leakage-free
matched-budget protocol (İşcan, 2026b). No semantic output-space operator exceeded
held-out accuracy over Best-of-N in the tested cells. Measured gains were obtained along
axes outside the semantic reasoning space, such as expression-layer recovery and compute
scheduling.
The present study examined the falsification signal within iterative feedback content.
This result does not merely repeat the previous negative findings. Execution-grounded facts
produced measurable recovery relative to a harmful code-bearing packet. However, this
recovery did not produce additional pooled unlocks over blind resampling in the tested sample.
Together, the three stages of the program support the following distinction: Popperian
vocabulary, model-internal self-judgment, and semantic post-hoc reasoning did not carry
a separable accuracy signal in the tested settings. Externally executed counterevidence
closed the pooled unlock gap associated with the code-bearing packet, but did not produce
additional pooled unlocks over blind resampling.
This distinction is central for the epistemology of feedback in LLMs. A critique asserted
by the model and a counterexample produced by an execution oracle are not the same type
of signal. A model-internal critique may be linguistically plausible, but it can remain bound
to the distributional regularities of the same model. An execution-derived counterexample
compares the model’s claim with a computational procedure outside the model. Therefore,
epistemic provenance is not merely metadata. The source from which feedback is produced,
the oracle under which it is generated, the auxiliary assumptions on which it depends, and
the placebo controls through which it survives are part of the interpretation of the outcome.
25

In the tested regime, the useful channel is not model-internal reflection, but externally
grounded error information.
Table 14 positions this contribution against prior work through experimental controls
rather than terminology. The self-repair literature has shown that execution feedback can
be useful on capable or specially trained models (X. Chen et al., 2024; Madaan et al.,
2023; T. Zheng et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024). However, because failing code, evidence,
and instruction are usually bundled into a single packet, exposure and evidence cannot be
separated. Intrinsic self-correction critiques have shown that revision can reduce performance
when no external signal is available (Huang et al., 2024; Stechly et al., 2025; Valmeekam et
al., 2023). In these studies, however, the feedback packet is often removed entirely, so the
distinction between the revision act and prompt content remains unresolved. In the present
study, blind re-generation and bare-code retry are evaluated as separate arms, and lower
performance is shown to be associated more with the code-bearing packet than with the
revision instruction.
The matched-budget literature has defined the correct operational baseline and has
shown that repair can be dominated by repeated sampling (Brown et al., 2024; Olausson
et al., 2024; Snell et al., 2025; K. Zheng et al., 2025). However, packet ingredients are
usually not decomposed with a placebo control within the same experiment. In this study,
same-unit pairing, equal output-sample counts, prompt-hidden scoring, fresh-generation
confirmation, and mirror placebo are combined within a single instrument. The breadth of
the design is deliberately limited: HumanEval+ and MBPP+, three small models, and a
single prompt scaffold are used. In return, packet components, the operational baseline, and
the content placebo are compared under controlled conditions. This trade-off strengthens
internal attribution while limiting external generalization.
The closest numerical precedents are directionally consistent with the present findings.
The prior result that buggy-context completions fall below no-context completions (Dinh
et al., 2023) supports the B > P direction. In the present design, the model’s own failing
code was evaluated against a blind operational baseline on the same units. The result that
expert-human feedback improves repair under a matched budget (Olausson et al., 2024) is
consistent with the direction that external evidence can carry value. Findings that multi-turn
feedback can produce small gains or negative outcomes (K. Zheng et al., 2025) indicate that
feedback quantity and useful content must be separated. The distinct contribution of the
present study is the attempt to separate task-relevant content from matched packet structure
through a same-code placebo contrast.
Three bounded practical implications follow from the findings. First, bare failing code
should not be treated as a reliable default feedback packet. In the primary sample, P
produced the lowest pooled unlock count among the tested arms and was exceeded by blind
resampling by +18 net unlocks. However, because the observed-harm gate is not satisfied
for the blind resampling comparison, a universal rule of “always discard the code” is not
supported. The supported conclusion is that bare-code retry does not provide reliable
superiority over blind resampling and produces lower pooled outcomes in the current sample.
Second, if failing-code retention is unavoidable, adding executed public-test facts appeared
to be the strongest feedback intervention among the tested options. The code-plus-facts arm
recovered the bare-code deficit at the pooled level and satisfied the observed-harm gate. The
same-code placebo contrast showed that generic diagnostic bullets did not substitute for
executed evidence. This recommendation should be bounded to settings in which source code
is already included in the packet, a public checker is available, and the current model-task
regime applies.
Third, every feedback design should be benchmarked against blind resampling under an
equal output-generation budget. Improvement over the previous completion does not imply
superiority over fresh sampling. In the present experiment, executed facts recovered the
bare-code deficit, but did not exceed the blind baseline. These implications should not be
interpreted as a deployment safety guarantee. The observed-harm gate is based on a point
estimate and does not include a confidence-bound or non-inferiority analysis. In addition, the
CF-SF–P comparison is a packet-level contrast involving independent trajectories. Therefore,
practical wording should not state that facts are definitively safe. It should instead state
that, in the tested sample, the code-plus-facts packet produces higher outcomes than the
bare-code packet and ties with blind resampling at the pooled level.
26

Table 14: Principal experimental controls in the closest prior work and in this study. “Matched
output budget” means that the same output-generation count was allocated to feedback and
sampling conditions. “Placebo” denotes a template-matched packet that contains no task identifiers
or executed facts. “Fresh generations” means that newly seeded outputs were used outside discovery
outputs.
Decomp. Matched Hidden Fresh
Work feedback output budget Placebo test generations Advantage / limitation
Self-Refine
(Madaan et al.,
2023)
— — — — — Broad task transfer,
feedback fully bundled
Self-Debugging
(X. Chen et al.,
2024)
partial — — — — Execution traces help,
no placebo or budget
match
LDB (Zhong et al.,
2024)
— — — — — Step-level debugging,
capable models and
bundled packet
OpenCode-
Interpreter
(T. Zheng et al.,
2024)
— — — — — Multi-turn gains,
trained model and
undecomposed packet
CYCLE (Ding et
al., 2024)
— — — — — Improves small models
by training, no
inference-time isolation
DebugBench (Tian
et al., 2024)
— — — — — Broad debugging
benchmark, feedback
not decomposed
Huang et al. (2024) — ✓ — — — Matched-budget
critique, packet
removed rather than
decomposed
Olausson et al.
(2024)
partial ✓ — — — Honest budget
accounting, bundle
compared with baseline
Brown et al. (2024) — ✓ — ✓ — Coverage-scaling
baseline, no feedback
decomposition
İşcan (2026a) partial ✓ ✓ ✓ — Labels-only and
placebo disambiguation,
procedural content does
not separate
İşcan (2026b) — ✓ partial ✓ — Leakage-free post-hoc
evaluation, no semantic
operator beats BoN
This study ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Mirror content contrast
and fresh-output
confirmation, limited
scale, language and
scaffold
4.1 Post-primary external-controller follow-ups
After completion of the primary analysis, prospective external-controller experiments
were evaluated on the search-bound stratum to examine whether the primary finding would
break under a more favorable subset and richer feedback channels. These experiments
involve prompt-only controllers carrying joint-embedding predictive architecture (JEPA),
reinforcement learning (RL), and linear upper-confidence-bound (LinUCB) components. The
mechanisms of the instruments are defined in §2.3.
The post hoc q
0 
stratification (§3.2) showed that the code-bearing packet produced its
highest relative recovery in the search-bound regime. This observation raises the question
of whether external controllers operating on the frozen small model could exceed blind
resampling in that stratum. Six controller experiments were conducted after the primary
27

Table 15: Six external-controller experiments conducted on the search-bound stratum (1/3≤q
0
<1)
after completion of the primary preregistered analysis. All use matched output budget R=4 and
frozen 0.5–1.5B Ollama models. The endpoint is a fresh candidate passing both the public and
prompt-hidden tiers (true unlock). These experiments were not preregistered and were not subjected
to the audit invariants of the primary frozen evaluation pipeline. n denotes the number of live-
confirmed search-bound units or the specified cell count. Abbreviations: RD, risk difference; pp,
percentage points.
Controller Mechanism / in-
jected signal
n vs B (net, p) 
vs placebo (net,
p)
Verdict / kill-cause
FJR-
JEPA-RL
LinUCB + JEPA
over prompt sub-
actions (learned
sub-action selec-
tion)
46 +3 (p=0.274) −1 (p=0.773) 
NULL — shape
placebo reproduced
the movement; gain
is prompt FORM
RIFT-
JEPA-RL
Symbolic assump-
tion inversion (10
axes)
— — — NULL — detector
fired on 0/24 live fail-
ing candidates (≡B);
green fixtures̸ = real
coverage
DCH-
JEPA-RL
Counter-
hypothesis +
offline group-
disjoint warm-start
— — — UNREALIZABLE —
required offline transi-
tion corpus absent on
disk
ECK-
JEPA-RL
Executable con-
straint kernel
(code-free interface
≈TC)
109 TC>B +3
(p=0.2905)
— UNDERPOWERED
— n<160 (own power
bar); learned stack
deferred
Self-repair
pilot
CF-SF: own near-
miss code + exe-
cutable public fail-
ing assertions
69 +6 (p=0.073);
RD +8.7 pp
[−1.4, +18.5]
vs GR-SHAPE: +1
(p=0.50); 0/69
leak
NULL — cached
+10/ + 11 did not
replicate prospec-
tively
EOT-
JEPA-RL
Execution-
outcome trace
(runtime observed-
vs-expected,
exceptions, deltas)
69 +3 (p=0.274) vs SHAPE: +1
(p=0.50)
NULL — near-
identical to the
self-repair pilot
study to test this question (Table 15). None produced a controls-surviving gain. These
experiments are non-preregistered internal follow-ups and are not cited as a separate reference.
Two experiments failed at the level of realizability before effect measurement. RIFT-
JEPA-RL used a detector operating over ten symbolic inversion axes. Although 19 modules
and 136 test green fixtures were produced, no axis was triggered in any of 24 distinct failing
candidates in the live data (fire-rate 0/24). Therefore, the controller remained observationally
equivalent to B. This result shows that green fixtures do not guarantee real live-data coverage.
DCH-JEPA-RL could not be instantiated because the required offline transition corpus was
not available on disk. Thus, it was shown that offline warm-start dependencies must be
verified before the run.
Two experiments produced null or underpowered results. FJR-JEPA-RL (LinUCB
+ JEPA over prompt sub-actions) produced FJR>B = +3 (p=0.274) in two cells
(HumanEval+/qwen2.5-coder-1.5b and 0.5b, n=46). However, the shape placebo repro-
duced the movement with FJR>FJR-SHAPE = −1 (p=0.773). This pattern suggests that
the observed movement may be associated more with prompt form than with learned content.
The executable constraint kernel of ECK-JEPA-RL showed interface liveness with a 1.0
fire-rate. However, the search-bound cached stratum (n=109) remained below the n≥160
power bar from the controller’s own pre-run power calculation. Since the code-free interface
corresponds to TC, search-bound TC>B was limited to +3 (p=0.2905), and the learned stack
was deferred.
28

The content channels carrying the model’s own near-miss code and its own runtime
behaviour were tested directly and prospectively. The self-repair pilot (CF-SF: the model’s
own near-miss code + executable public failing assertions) was run on 69 live-confirmed
search-bound units with 1,104 fresh generations. CF-SF>B was found to be +6 (p=0.073,
cluster-bootstrap risk difference (RD) +8.7 percentage points (pp), 95% confidence interval
(CI) [−1.4, +18.5] pp, including zero). However, the decisive control CF-SF>GR-SHAPE was
only +1 (p=0.50). The placebo was verified to be content-free (0/69 leakage). The cached
post hoc +10/ + 11 discovery was not prospectively replicated. This result indicates that
the discovery may have been a small-n discovery artifact.
EOT-JEPA-RL injected the candidate’s actual runtime behaviour as an executable
trace. This channel includes observed-versus-expected values, exceptions, and deltas, and
constitutes a richer content source beyond raw exposure and static tests. On the same
69 units and 1,104 generations, EOT-NOLEARN>B was +3 (p=0.274), and the decisive
contrast EOT-NOLEARN>EOT-SHAPE was +1 (p=0.50). At the full-public-pass level, the
two arms remained equal (13=13, n=69). This pattern produced a result almost identical to
the self-repair pilot.
These follow-ups strengthen the philosophical scope of the primary conclusion but do
not change its evidential status. The two strongest content channels in the program, own
near-miss code and own runtime behaviour, prospectively tie with content-free shape placebo
in the most favorable search-bound stratum. Together with the capacity wall in the q
0
=0
stratum, this result points to a practical boundary for gains obtainable through inference-time
content manipulation on a frozen small model. These prospective null results are consistent
with the primary finding: the observed CF-SF=B tie and the B>P trap in the primary
family appear consistent with a form-not-content ceiling. Exceeding this boundary may
require inference-aware retraining or search-space restructuring rather than frozen-model
inference-time manipulation (Chow et al., 2025; Ding et al., 2024).
4.2 Validity boundaries and future work
The validity boundaries of the study should be evaluated across construct, conclusion,
internal, and external validity. Construct validity is strengthened by the execution endpoint
requiring both public and prompt-hidden tests. However, dead-status selection depends only
on the public-tier pass/fail outcomes of the cached pool. The prompt-hidden tier is used
only at the final true-unlock scoring endpoint. Test cases are not shown in any prompt.
Nevertheless, because the prompt-hidden tier defines the final scoring endpoint, it is not
called an untouched external test set. This distinction should be preserved for all claims.
Conclusion validity is supported by exact paired tests, Holm correction, immutable unit
keys, and pre-run power analysis. In contrast,
̂
 OR
pool 
is a pooled discordant ratio and should
not be interpreted as a Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel (CMH) estimator. No equivalence test is
performed for the blind tie. No confidence-bound is computed for the observed-harm gate.
These quantities provide descriptive boundaries.
Internal validity is not equal across contrasts. Since the CF-SF–GR-SHAPE contrast
holds source code, failure instruction, template, and bullet count fixed, it is the most tightly
controlled content contrast in the design. However, exact token length and lexical distribution
are not equal. Therefore, the result provides evidence in favor of task-relevant content, but
does not eliminate all surface-form alternatives. In the B–P comparison, failing code, failure
instruction, and prompt length change together. The sixth arm narrows the instruction factor,
but does not separate code content from intrinsic length. A content-free, syntax-matched,
and length-matched code-like padding arm is needed to test the remaining confound.
The CF-SF–P comparison is also not a same-code single-ingredient contrast. Whereas
CF-SF is pinned to the TC trajectory, P follows its own trajectory. Therefore, C2
′ 
measures
the arm-level effect of the code-plus-facts packet relative to the bare-code packet. It does
not measure the isolated effect of adding facts to identical source code. Same-code content
attribution is based primarily on the CF-SF–GR-SHAPE contrast. Future work should include
a direct P+facts arm that mirrors the P source code.
The term matched compute is also bounded. Output generation count is equalized.
However, input tokens, wall-clock time, and total floating-point operations (FLOPs) are
not equalized. Longer code-bearing prompts carry higher prefill cost. The design controls
the additional-output advantage, but does not provide strict compute equivalence. Token-
matched and FLOP-matched comparisons would provide a stronger compute claim.
29

Fresh-generation confirmation is conducted on the same units, cached pools, and incum-
bents. This design prevents reuse of discovery outputs and provides seed-level robustness. It
does not provide independent-task replication or benchmark-level generalization. The disjoint
sample preserves the co-primary directions, but the content-attribution contrast reverses.
Therefore, primary C3
′ 
should be considered internally strong but externally unstable.
Preregistration is based on an internal version-control timestamp and is not a third-party
registry. Frozen audit rules produce initial failures during the main and follow-up runs, and
post-run dated amendments are applied. Outputs are not changed, original verdicts are
preserved, and amendments are gated by executable counterexamples. Nevertheless, amended
audit status does not have the same evidential weight as untouched external preregistration.
Independent and externally registered replication would reduce this limitation.
External validity is limited along four main dimensions.
Model scale. Only 0.5B–1.5B frozen models are evaluated. On larger models, the bare-
code trap may weaken, disappear, or produce a different pattern (Dinh et al., 2023; Lam,
Wang, Huang, & Lyu, 2025; Olausson et al., 2024).
Task regime. The estimand applies to tasks for which no candidate in the finite cached
pool passed the public tier. Effects may shrink or change direction on easier tasks that can
be solved by ordinary sampling.
Benchmark and language. Only Python HumanEval+ and MBPP+ tasks are used.
Repository-level, multi-file, interactive, or different-language coding tasks are not evaluated.
Prompt scaffold. A single prompt template is used for each arm. Robustness over
alternative prompt families and surface forms is not tested.
Future work should directly target the identified boundaries. Priority extensions include
a direct mirror arm that adds executed facts to identical source code from the P trajectory,
syntax- and length-matched irrelevant-code controls, token- and FLOP-matched comparisons,
externally registered independent-task replication, larger model families, non-dead tasks,
and repository-level benchmarks. Token-level or activation-level analyses are also needed
to distinguish the anchoring account from general distraction, effective-attention reduction,
and trajectory-persistence explanations. This boundary is further supported by the six
prospective external-controller experiments conducted on the most favorable search-bound
stratum (Table 15). These experiments suggest that, in frozen small models, inference-time
content manipulation may need to be replaced by inference-aware retraining or search-space
restructuring.
Under these boundaries, the central conclusion is bounded as follows. In the primary
dead-task sample, bare code-bearing retry remains below blind resampling. The code-plus-
facts packet recovers this deficit, and the same-code placebo comparison favors executed
fact content. Nevertheless, none of the tested feedback arms exceeds blind resampling,
content attribution is not stable in the disjoint sensitivity sample, and deployment wording
is bounded only by the descriptive observed-harm gate.
The program-level interpretation is broader, but still bounded. In the tested frozen-small-
model settings, the falsification signal does not produce separable accuracy gain as Popperian
vocabulary, model-internal self-judgment, or semantic post-hoc selection. Execution-grounded
counterevidence is able to repair the deficit produced by harmful conditioning. Therefore, the
value carried by falsification here arises not from the model evaluating its own conjecture more
effectively, but from that conjecture being exposed to externally produced and executable
criticism. From the perspective of scientific methodology, the main contribution is that
this critical relation is not left as a philosophical metaphor, but is embedded into the
measurement design. The model conjecture is tested by the execution oracle, whereas
the researcher conjecture is tested through preregistration, placebo controls, a matched-
budget baseline, fresh-generation confirmation, and executable audits. Thus, falsification
is operated in LLM evaluation not merely as a test that filters failed programs, but as a
reflexive methodological discipline that audits the research arrangement producing evidence,
attribution, and claim calibration.
5 Conclusion
In this study, the self-repair feedback packet used for small frozen code models in
deployment settings where retraining is not feasible was examined at the component level.
Across six benchmark×model cells constructed from HumanEval+ and MBPP+ with three
30

0.5B–1.5B frozen code models, 290 zero-pass-in-pool task–cell units were evaluated under
a five-arm controlled decomposition. In the main run, 7,000 fresh seeded generations
were produced, and in the preregistered sixth-arm follow-up, 1,400 additional fresh seeded
generations were produced. The output-generation count was equalized across arms, and
correctness was determined by execution on public tests and prompt-hidden EvalPlus tests.
Thus, it was tested directly not only whether self-repair feedback produces more text, a
longer prompt, or an additional retry opportunity, but also which feedback component carries
execution-grounded signal.
The obtained results indicate that bare failing code should not be assumed to be a
reliable feedback object. Blind resampling exceeded the bare-code arm by +18 net unlocks
(discordant 25/7, Holm-adjusted p = 0.0021). In the preregistered sixth-arm diagnostic
follow-up, no statistically detectable effect was found for the failure instruction, and the
remaining +15 difference remained associated with code-bearing context (Holm-adjusted
p = 0.0026). Nevertheless, because code content was not separated from intrinsic prompt
length, pure code-causation is not claimed. The code-plus-facts packet produced +18 net
recovery relative to the bare-code packet (discordant 21/3, Holm-adjusted p = 0.00042). In
the same-code placebo contrast, a +15 difference was obtained in favor of executed facts
(Holm-adjusted p = 0.0041). This pattern shows that, on the primary sample, recovery was
associated not merely with generic feedback shape, but with task-relevant and execution-
grounded content under the matched dimensions. However, the direction change of the
content-attribution contrast in the disjoint sensitivity sample forms a clear boundary for
external stability. In addition, because exact token length and lexical distribution were not
equalized, all surface-form explanations were not ruled out.
None of the tested feedback arms exceeded blind resampling under the matched output-
generation budget. Code-plus-facts and blind resampling each produced 26 unlocks, but did
so over different unit sets and showed a symmetric 20/20 discordant split. This outcome is
not evidence of equivalence, non-inferiority, or identical behavior. It only showed an observed
pooled tie under the current sample and output-generation budget. Therefore, the main
observed function of the code-plus-facts packet was to close the pooled unlock deficit relative
to the bare-code packet, not to produce additional pooled unlocks over blind resampling.
The preregistered observed-harm gate is satisfied for the code-plus-facts versus bare-code
comparison, but is not satisfied for the blind resampling versus bare-code comparison. This
gate should be interpreted only as a point-estimate wording constraint. If failing code must
remain inside the packet, the addition of executed public-test facts is supported by the
current evidence. By contrast, it is not claimed that failing code should always be discarded,
that the code-plus-facts packet is deployment-safe, or that it is superior to blind resampling.
The philosophical significance of the results is that falsification carries value in LLMs not
as a prompting vocabulary or as a model-internal self-critique capability, but as external
and executable criticism. In this study, the generated program was treated as a tentative
conjecture. The violation observed during public execution was evaluated as an oracle-relative
counterexample to a specific behavioral consequence of that conjecture. The findings sharpen
when read together with the two preceding studies, in which Popperian vocabulary, model-
internal self-judgment, and semantic post-hoc falsification did not produce separable accuracy
gain in the tested small-model settings. Externally executed counterevidence was able to
repair the loss associated with harmful conditioning. However, this signal was not observed
as a content lever that exceeded blind resampling. The value carried by falsification here is
therefore not the creation of a new capability in the model, but the opening of the model
conjecture to external, auditable, and execution-grounded criticism.
This boundary is also supported by six prospective external-controller follow-ups con-
ducted on the search-bound stratum. The two strongest content channels, own near-miss code
and runtime execution trace, tie with content-free shape placebo (§4.1). These follow-ups
should not be treated as preregistered primary evidence, but as post-primary prospective
evidence examining the boundary of the primary finding in a more favorable stratum. Nev-
ertheless, the observed pattern is consistent with the interpretation that inference-time
content manipulation remains limited in frozen small models, and that robust gains beyond
blind resampling may require inference-aware retraining, stronger search procedures, or
search-space restructuring.
The transferable contribution of the study is not a new repair algorithm. The central
contribution is a reflexive measurement and evaluation methodology that makes claims
31

about self-repair feedback falsifiable. Packet decomposition, mirror placebo, matched output-
generation budget, same-unit discordant analysis, fresh-generation confirmation, immutable
provenance, and executable audits are combined within a single instrument. Thus, not only
model outputs, but also the evaluation system that produces claims about those outputs, is
left open to critical scrutiny. Preserving original audit failures and dated amendments in the
record prevents negative evidence from being neutralized post hoc and applies the logic of
falsification back onto the research pipeline itself. For this reason, the final contribution of the
study is not that self-repair is improved by a better prompt, but that LLM feedback claims are
transformed into measurable, auditable, and falsifiable scientific objects under the distinctions
of content-vs-form, discovery-vs-confirmation, and statistical-verdict-vs-audit-verdict.
Reproducibility and Data Availability
The research data, result manifests, generated outputs, prompt renders, seed payloads,
audit records, pre-registration and amendment records, generation and evaluation code,
falsification suites, and figure/table generation scripts produced and analyzed in this study
have not been released through a public repository, DOI, or external deposit. These materials
are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request for academic verification
and replication. Sharing of the requested materials may be limited by file size, technical
transfer constraints, third-party benchmark/model license conditions, and institutional policy
constraints. The open-weight models and EvalPlus benchmarks used in the study are already
available from their respective public sources.
Ethics and Generative-AI Use Disclosure
The study evaluates publicly released open-weight code models on public benchmarks.
No human subjects or personal data are involved. Large language models were used in
two declared roles: as the objects of the study, namely the three tested frozen models, and
as manuscript-preparation assistants for drafting and editing under the author’s direction
and review. All experimental design decisions, pre-registrations, and verdicts belong to the
author. All reported numbers are produced by the executable pipeline described above.
Funding
This work was supported by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Türkiye
(TÜBİTAK) under the 1001 programme, project no. 225M316, “A Tilt-Trirotor Vertical
Take-Off and Landing Controller Enabling Task-Oriented Transfer and Rapid Adaptation:
Hardware-in-the-Loop and Real Validation of a Meta-Learning–Based Reinforcement Learning
Architecture.” The meta-learning code developed in that project was integrated into the test
harness together with the frozen language models studied here and was used during the
agent-design phase to optimize the algorithms designed by the author.
Conflict of Interest
The author declares that there is no conflict of interest.
References
Austin, J., Odena, A., Nye, M., Bosma, M., Michalewski, H., Dohan, D., Jiang, E., Cai, C.,
Terry, M., Le, Q., & Sutton, C. (2021). Program synthesis with large language models.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732
Brown, B., Juravsky, J., Ehrlich, R., Clark, R., Le, Q. V., Ré, C., & Mirhoseini, A. (2024).
Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated sampling. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21787
Brucks, M., & Toubia, O. (2025). Prompt architecture induces methodological arti-
facts in large language models. PLOS ONE, 20 (4), e0319159. doi: 10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0319159
Chen, J., Tang, H., Chu, Z., Chen, Q., Wang, Z., Liu, M., & Qin, B. (2024). Divide-
and-conquer meets consensus: Unleashing the power of functions in code generation.
In Advances in neural information processing systems 37 (neurips). Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20092 (arXiv:2405.20092)
32

Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., de Oliveira Pinto, H. P., Kaplan, J., Edwards,
H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N., Brockman, G., Ray, A., Puri, R., Krueger, G., Petrov,
M., Khlaaf, H., Sastry, G., Mishkin, P., Chan, B., Gray, S., Ryder, N., Pavlov, M.,
Power, A., Kaiser, L., Bavarian, M., Winter, C., Tillet, P., Such, F. P., Cummings,
D., Plappert, M., Chantzis, F., Barnes, E., Herbert-Voss, A., Guss, W. H., Nichol,
A., Paino, A., Tezak, N., Tang, J., Babuschkin, I., Balaji, S., Jain, S., Saunders, W.,
Hesse, C., Carr, A. N., Leike, J., Achiam, J., Misra, V., Morikawa, E., Radford, A.,
Knight, M., Brundage, M., Murati, M., Mayer, K., Welinder, P., McGrew, B., Amodei,
D., McCandlish, S., Sutskever, I., & Zaremba, W. (2021). Evaluating large language
models trained on code. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374
Chen, X., Lin, M., Schärli, N., & Zhou, D. (2024). Teaching large language models to self-
debug. In The twelfth international conference on learning representations. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05128 (ICLR 2024; arXiv:2304.05128)
Cho, J., Kang, D., Kim, H., & Lee, G. G. (2025). Self-correcting code generation using
small language models. In Findings of the association for computational linguistics:
Emnlp 2025 (pp. 2345–2368). Suzhou, China: Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. Retrieved from https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-emnlp.127/ doi:
10.18653/v1/2025.findings-emnlp.127
Chow, Y., Tennenholtz, G., Gur, I., Zhuang, V., Dai, B., Thiagarajan, S., Boutilier, C.,
Agarwal, R., Kumar, A., & Faust, A. (2025). Inference-aware fine-tuning for best-
of-n sampling in large language models. In International conference on learning
representations (iclr). Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15287 (ICLR
2025; arXiv:2412.15287)
Damani, M., Shenfeld, I., Peng, A., Bobu, A., & Andreas, J. (2025). Learning how hard to
think: Input-adaptive allocation of LM computation. In International conference on
learning representations (iclr). Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.04707
(arXiv:2410.04707)
Ding, Y., Min, M. J., Kaiser, G., & Ray, B. (2024). CYCLE: Learning to self-refine the code
generation. In Proceedings of the acm on programming languages (oopsla). Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.18746 (OOPSLA 2024; arXiv:2403.18746)
Dinh, T., Zhao, J., Tan, S., Negrinho, R., Lausen, L., Zha, S., & Karypis, G. (2023). Large
language models of code fail at completing code with potential bugs. In Advances
in neural information processing systems 36 (neurips). Retrieved from https://
arxiv.org/abs/2306.03438 (arXiv:2306.03438)
Fagerland, M. W., Lydersen, S., & Laake, P. (2013). The McNemar test for binary
matched-pairs data: mid-p and asymptotic are better than exact conditional. BMC
Medical Research Methodology, 13 (1), 91. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2288-13-91 (Open Access; 8 pages) doi: 10.1186/1471-2288-13-91
Gorman, K., & Bedrick, S. (2019). We need to talk about standard splits. In Proceedings of
the 57th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (acl) (pp. 2786–
2791). Retrieved from https://aclanthology.org/P19-1267/ doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-
1267
Guo, D., Zhu, Q., Yang, D., Xie, Z., Dong, K., Zhang, W., Chen, G., Bi, X., Wu, Y., Li,
Y. K., Luo, F., Xiong, Y., & Liang, W. (2024). DeepSeek-Coder: When the large
language model meets programming – the rise of code intelligence. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.14196
Hofman, J. M., Chatzimparmpas, A., Sharma, A., Watts, D. J., & Hullman, J. (2023).
Pre-registration for predictive modeling. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/
2311.18807
Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian
Journal of Statistics, 6 (2), 65–70.
Huang, J., Chen, X., Mishra, S., Zheng, H. S., Yu, A. W., Song, X., & Zhou, D. (2024).
Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. In The twelfth international
conference on learning representations. Retrieved from https://openreview.net/
forum?id=IkmD3fKBPQ (Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024)
Hui, B., Yang, J., Cui, Z., Yang, J., Liu, D., Zhang, L., Liu, T., Zhang, J., Yu, B., Lu, K.,
Dang, K., Fan, Y., Zhang, Y., Yang, A., Men, R., Huang, F., Zheng, B., Miao, Y.,
Quan, S., Feng, Y., Ren, X., Ren, X., Zhou, J., & Lin, J. (2024). Qwen2.5-Coder
technical report. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.12186
33

İşcan, M. (2026a). Scaffold, not vocabulary? a controlled, two-tier, pre-registered study
of a popperian code-generation skill. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2606
.06454
İşcan, M. (2026b). Selection without signal, recovery through expression: A measurement
study of post-hoc falsification operators for frozen small code models. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.16999
Jiang, N., Li, X., Wang, S., Zhou, Q., Hossain, S. B., Ray, B., Kumar, V., Ma, X., &
Deoras, A. (2024). LeDex: Training LLMs to better self-debug and explain code.
In Advances in neural information processing systems 37 (neurips). Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18649 (arXiv:2405.18649)
Jin, H., & Chen, H. (2025). Uncovering systematic failures of LLMs in verifying code
against natural language specifications. In 2025 40th IEEE/ACM international
conference on automated software engineering (ASE) (pp. 3819–3823). IEEE. doi:
10.1109/ASE63991.2025.00323
Jones, E., & Steinhardt, J. (2022). Capturing failures of large language models via human
cognitive biases. In Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (neurips).
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.12299
Khojah, R., de Oliveira Neto, F. G., Mohamad, M., & Leitner, P. (2025). The impact
of prompt programming on function-level code generation. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, 51 (8), 2381–2401. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2025.3587794
Lam, M. H., Wang, C., Huang, J.-t., & Lyu, M. R. (2025). CodeCrash: Stress testing
LLM reasoning under structural and semantic perturbations. Retrieved from https://
arxiv.org/abs/2504.14119
Lavon, B., Katz, S., & Wolf, L. (2025). Execution guided line-by-line code generation.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10948
Liu, J., Xia, C. S., Wang, Y., & Zhang, L. (2023). Is your code generated by ChatGPT
really correct? Rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation. In
Advances in neural information processing systems (Vol. 36, pp. 21558–21572). Re-
trieved from https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
43e9d647ccd3e4b7b5baab53f0368686-Abstract-Conference.html 
(37th Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023))
Madaan, A., Tandon, N., Gupta, P., Hallinan, S., Gao, L., Wiegreffe, S., Alon, U., Dziri,
N., Prabhumoye, S., Yang, Y., Gupta, S., Majumder, B. P., Hermann, K., Welleck,
S., Yazdanbakhsh, A., & Clark, P. (2023). Self-Refine: Iterative refinement with self-
feedback. In Advances in neural information processing systems (neurips). Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17651 (arXiv:2303.17651)
Mayo, D. G., & Spanos, A. (2006). Severe testing as a basic concept in a Neyman–Pearson
philosophy of induction. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 57 (2),
323–357. (Advance Access published April 11, 2006) doi: 10.1093/bjps/axl003
McNemar, Q. (1947). Note on the sampling error of the difference between correlated
proportions or percentages. Psychometrika, 12 (2), 153–157. doi: 10.1007/BF02295996
Olausson, T. X., Inala, J. P., Wang, C., Gao, J., & Solar-Lezama, A. (2024). Is self-repair a
silver bullet for code generation? In Proceedings of the twelfth international conference
on learning representations (iclr). Retrieved from https://openreview.net/forum
?id=y0GJXRungR
Panickssery, A., Bowman, S. R., & Feng, S. (2024). LLM evaluators recognize and fa-
vor their own generations. In Advances in neural information processing systems
37 (neurips 2024). Retrieved from https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2024/hash/7f1f0218e45f5414c79c0679633e47bc-Abstract-Conference.html doi:
10.52202/079017-2197
Popper, K. R. (1959). The logic of scientific discovery. London: Hutchinson. (English
translation of Logik der Forschung (1934); degree of corroboration C(h,e) in Appendix
*ix)
Popper, K. R. (1963). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientific knowledge.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. (Verisimilitude/truthlikeness in ch. 10 and
Addenda)
Rizqullah, M., & Albassam, E. (2026). Model-agnostic empirical evaluation of test-driven
prompt engineering on improving accuracy and efficiency in large language mod-
els Python code generation. IEEE Access, 14 , 22801–22821. doi: 10.1109/AC-
34

CESS.2026.3662817
Sclar, M., Choi, Y., Tsvetkov, Y., & Suhr, A. (2024). Quantifying language models’ sensitivity
to spurious features in prompt design, or: How I learned to start worrying about prompt
formatting. In The twelfth international conference on learning representations (iclr).
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.11324 (arXiv:2310.11324)
Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Berman, E., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K., & Yao, S. (2023).
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in neural
information processing systems (neurips). Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/
2303.11366 (arXiv:2303.11366)
Singhi, N., Bansal, H., Hosseini, A., Grover, A., Chang, K.-W., Rohrbach, M., & Rohrbach,
A. (2025). When to solve, when to verify: Compute-optimal problem solving and
generative verification for LLM reasoning. In Conference on language modeling (colm).
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.01005 (arXiv:2504.01005)
Snell, C., Lee, J., Xu, K., & Kumar, A. (2025). Scaling LLM test-time compute optimally
can be more effective than scaling model parameters. In International conference on
learning representations (iclr). Retrieved from https://openreview.net/forum?id=
4FWAwZtd2n (ICLR 2025 (Oral); arXiv:2408.03314)
Song, Y., Zhang, H., Eisenach, C., Kakade, S. M., Foster, D., & Ghai, U. (2025). Mind
the gap: Examining the self-improvement capabilities of large language models. In
International conference on learning representations (iclr). Retrieved from https://
arxiv.org/abs/2412.02674 (ICLR 2025; arXiv:2412.02674)
Stechly, K., Valmeekam, K., & Kambhampati, S. (2025). On the self-verification limitations of
large language models on reasoning and planning tasks. In International conference on
learning representations (iclr). Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.08115
(ICLR 2025; arXiv:2402.08115)
Takallou, M. A., Gautam, A., & Shirolkar, P. (2026). LLMs for end-to-end machine
learning: A comprehensive review. IEEE Access, 14 , 47717–47738. doi: 10.1109/AC-
CESS.2026.3678429
Tian, R., Ye, Y., Qin, Y., Cong, X., Lin, Y., Pan, Y., Wu, Y., Hui, H., Liu, W., Liu, Z., & Sun,
M. (2024). DebugBench: Evaluating debugging capability of large language models.
In Findings of the association for computational linguistics: Acl 2024. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04621 (arXiv:2401.04621)
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Science, 185 (4157), 1124–1131. doi: 10.1126/science.185.4157.1124
Valmeekam, K., Marquez, M., & Kambhampati, S. (2023). Can Large Language Models Really
Improve by Self-critiquing Their Own Plans? Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/
abs/2310.08118 (Preprint. arXiv:2310.08118, 12 Oct 2023.)
Wang, E., Cassano, F., Wu, C., Bai, Y., Song, W., Nath, V., Han, Z., Hendryx, S., Yue,
S., & Zhang, H. (2025). Planning in natural language improves LLM search for code
generation. In International conference on learning representations (iclr). Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.03733 (ICLR 2025; arXiv:2409.03733)
Wang, J., Huang, Y., Chen, C., Liu, Z., Wang, S., & Wang, Q. (2024). Software testing with
large language models: Survey, landscape, and vision. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, 50 (4), 911–936. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2024.3368208
Yang, G., Zhou, Y., Chen, X., Zhang, X., Zhuo, T. Y., & Chen, T. (2024). Chain-of-thought in
neural code generation: From and for lightweight language models. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, 50 (9), 2437–2457. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2024.3440503
Zhang, K., Wang, D., Xia, J., Wang, W. Y., & Li, L. (2023). ALGO: Synthesizing algorithmic
programs with LLM-generated oracle verifiers. In Advances in neural information
processing systems 36 (neurips). Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14591
(arXiv:2305.14591)
Zheng, K., Decugis, J., Gehring, J., Cohen, T., Negrevergne, B., & Synnaeve, G. (2025). What
makes large language models reason in (multi-turn) code generation? In International
conference on learning representations (iclr). Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/
abs/2410.08105 (ICLR 2025; arXiv:2410.08105)
Zheng, T., Zhang, G., Shen, T., Liu, X., Lin, B. Y., Fu, J., Chen, W., & Yue, X.
(2024). OpenCodeInterpreter: Integrating code generation with execution and re-
finement. In Findings of the association for computational linguistics: Acl 2024
(pp. 12834–12859). Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguis-
35

tics. Retrieved from https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.762/ doi:
10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.762
Zheng, Z., Ning, K., Zhong, Q., Chen, J., Chen, W., Guo, L., Wang, W., & Wang, Y.
(2025). Towards an understanding of large language models in software engineering
tasks. Empirical Software Engineering, 30 (2), 50. doi: 10.1007/s10664-024-10602-0
Zhong, L., Wang, Z., & Shang, J. (2024). Debug like a human: A large language model
debugger via verifying runtime execution step by step. In Findings of the association
for computational linguistics: Acl 2024 (pp. 851–870). Bangkok, Thailand: Association
for Computational Linguistics. Retrieved from https://aclanthology.org/2024
.findings-acl.49/ doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.49
Zubair, F., Al-Hitmi, M., & Catal, C. (2025). The use of large language models for program
repair. Computer Standards & Interfaces, 93 , 103951. doi: 10.1016/j.csi.2024.103951
A Audit and amendment trail
This appendix records the audit events in the order in which they occurred, together with
their dispositions and evidential status. The purpose is not only to report the final amended
verdict, but also to make the failure modes of the evaluation pipeline itself reproducible
and critically visible. For this reason, the original audit failures were not deleted, dated
amendments were reported separately, and post-amendment verdicts were not substituted
for the original as-frozen verdicts.
(i) 
Pre-run audit. Before any generation was initiated, the implementation was tested with
a falsification suite containing eight executable counterexamples. The suite covered
mirror-equality violation, seed-namespace violation, foreign-prefix seeds, sample-identity
violation, hidden-test isolation, token-bound violation, resume integrity, and hostile
model outputs. The suite result was recorded as 8/8 passed. Six per-cell pre-run
manifests were committed before the first token was generated. Thus, sample identity,
model digest, prompt rendering, and initial constraints were made version-controlled so
that they could not be changed after the run.
(ii) Discovery-stage inheritance. The pooled-equals-cell-sum invariant and immutable unit
keys were inherited from the corrected evaluator of the discovery stage. In that stage, a
pooling-collapse bug was caught by adversarial review. The bug caused bare task keys
to merge units across model cells and collapsed 290 units into 202 rows. This issue was
fixed before the discovery-stage verdict was issued. In the current study, exact equality
between pooled counts and per-cell sums was preserved as an executable invariant to
prevent the same class of error from recurring.
(iii) Main post-run anti-reuse audit. The as-frozen anti-reuse invariant of the main run
returned AUDIT-FAILURE. The failure was triggered on 28 distinct (output, prompt)
hash pairs shared with discovery records. These pairs appeared in 34 confirmation
records in total. Before any code change was made, a forensic audit was conducted.
This audit showed that no seed-payload collision was present, that the records exhibiting
equality had distinct namespaces and distinct seeds, that prompt equality was expected
by design, and that certain round-0 prompts could remain byte-identical because the
same task lists, cached pools, and incumbents were preserved. The record-level collision
incidence was computed as 34/7,000 ≈ 0.5%.
The arm distribution of colliding records was found to be P = 17, CF-SF = 15, TC = 2,
B = 0, and GR-SHAPE = 0. This distribution was recorded descriptively and was not
used for causal or directional interpretation. Because provenance records were distinct,
output-hash equality alone was not accepted as evidence of cross-run reuse.
With the dated amendment, output-pair equality under intentionally identical prompts
was reclassified from a fatal predicate to a counted diagnostic. Seed-payload collision,
namespace reuse, and provenance inconsistency were retained as fatal predicates. The
amendment was gated by a five-counterexample falsification suite, including a counterex-
ample requiring a doctored seed-copy to remain fatal. The official amended evaluation
was recomputed only after the suite passed 5/5. Both the as-frozen AUDIT-FAILURE
verdict and the post-amendment CERTIFIED verdicts are preserved in the main results
documents and in this appendix.
36

(iv) Deconfounding follow-up audit. The as-frozen evaluation of the sixth-arm diagnostic
follow-up also returned AUDIT-FAILURE. The failure consisted of exactly 120 missing-
baseline errors, corresponding to 60 disjoint units crossed with two baseline arms. Before
any code change was made, the forensic audit showed that baseline records were present
under the disjoint collection of the main manifest, but that the loader was reading only
the fixed-sample collection.
The lookup scope was expanded by a dated amendment. The missing-baseline predicate
was retained as fatal for genuinely absent units. Before the diagnostic follow-up verdict
was computed, the amendment was gated by two added counterexamples requiring
the disjoint baseline to resolve and an intentionally deleted baseline to produce a fatal
failure. Original and amended verdicts are reported separately in §3.2.
(v) 
Post hoc q
0 
stratification. The primary sample was divided post hoc into four bins
according to the cached incumbent’s public-pass fraction q
0
: q
0
=0 (n=159), 0<q
0
<1/3
(n=22), 1/3≤q
0
<2/3 (n=51), and 2/3≤q
0
<1 (n=58). The total was preserved as
n = 290. This stratification was not preregistered and does not generate a new
confirmatory claim. The calculations were derived from committed result manifests,
and no generation output or score was changed. The corresponding results are reported
as post hoc sensitivity evidence in §3.2.
(vi) Prospective controller follow-ups. Six external-controller experiments were conducted on
the search-bound stratum. Two pilot runs, namely self-repair and EOT-JEPA-RL, were
run on 69 live-confirmed units using separate namespaces and fresh seeds, with 1,104
generations each. No audit failure was triggered in either pilot run. These controller
experiments were conducted outside the frozen evaluation pipeline of the primary study.
Therefore, they were not subject to the audit invariants of the primary pipeline. The
results and this limitation are reported in §4.1.
This audit trail was kept to show that the statistical verdict and the audit verdict have
different epistemic statuses. Satisfaction of statistical thresholds does not imply that pipeline-
level assumptions are automatically valid. Similarly, the amended verdict obtained after a
dated amendment does not mean that the original as-frozen failure has been removed from
the record. This distinction was preserved so that the evaluation system’s own conjectures
would also remain open to executable counterexamples.
B Prompt scaffolds
The five arms share a single general scaffold family and differ only in the conditioning block.
The templates below are reproduced verbatim from the repository’s frozen prompt builders.
<TASK PROMPT> denotes the unmodified benchmark task, <INCUMBENT CODE> denotes the
trajectory’s best-so-far failing solution, and <FACT BULLETS> denotes at most six violated
public assertions. Fact bullets were produced by the frozen no-ellipsis renderer as literal input
and expected-output equality statements and were not elided. The incumbent’s observed
output was not additionally shown in the prompt. <GENERIC BULLETS> denotes placebo
bullets drawn in order from the frozen generic list and matched in count to the fact bullets.
B (blind resample).
Write a Python solution for this task.
<TASK PROMPT>
Return your answer in a ‘‘‘python code block.
BI (blind + instruction, the deconfounding sixth arm).
Write a Python solution for this task.
<TASK PROMPT>
Your solution failed the tests. Write a corrected, different solution.
Return your answer in a ‘‘‘python code block.
37

P (bare own code).
Write a Python solution for this task.
<TASK PROMPT>
A previous solution is shown below. It did not pass the public tests.
Previous solution:
‘‘‘python
<INCUMBENT CODE>
‘‘‘
Your solution failed the tests. Write a corrected, different solution.
Return your answer in a ‘‘‘python code block.
TC (facts only).
Write a Python solution for this task.
<TASK PROMPT>
Your implementation must satisfy these input/output requirements:
- <FACT BULLETS>
Return your answer in a ‘‘‘python code block.
CF-SF (own code + the same facts).
Write a Python solution for this task.
<TASK PROMPT>
A previous solution is shown below. It did not pass the public tests.
Previous solution:
‘‘‘python
<INCUMBENT CODE>
‘‘‘
Your implementation must satisfy these input/output requirements:
- <FACT BULLETS>
Your solution failed the tests. Write a corrected, different solution.
Return your answer in a ‘‘‘python code block.
GR-SHAPE (own code + shape-matched generic bullets). The GR-SHAPE template is
identical to the CF-SF template. Only <FACT BULLETS> is replaced with <GENERIC BULLETS>.
The same source-code block was preserved and verified against CF-SF through per-round
SHA-256 equality. The bullet count was also kept identical to CF-SF. Bullets were drawn in
order from the frozen generic-requirement list:
- the function returns a value of the documented return type
- the implementation handles the documented input domain
- the result is deterministic for the same inputs
- the function preserves the documented ordering requirements
- edge cases described by the task are handled explicitly
- the implementation follows the task’s stated behavior
An executable forbidden-token audit was applied to every rendered GR-SHAPE prompt. This
audit verified that no generic bullet contained the task’s function name, any public-assert
literal or constant, or any identifier extracted from the task prompt. Within the same (task,
round), the fact bullets shown to the TC and CF-SF arms were kept byte-identical. This
equality was enforced by a per-round constraint-block SHA-256 check.
38

C Per-cell unlock rates
Table 16 re-expresses the per-cell true-unlock counts in Table 8 as rates for readers who
wish to compare cells with unequal sizes. The pooled row repeats the endpoint percentages
reported in §3.1. This table does not define a new measurement or a new statistical
family. Its purpose is to make clearer how the per-cell counts should be read under different
denominators.
Table 16: Per-cell true-unlock rates by arm (percentage of cell units) and the pooled rate over all
290 units in the final row. Rates are a re-expression of the counts in Table 8. No new measurement
is reported. The pooled ordering is not driven by a single cell. The per-cell maximum belongs to B
or CF-SF in five of the six cells. The only exception is the HE+/deepseek-1.3b cell, where TC leads
with 10.2%. P does not reach the cell maximum in any cell.
Cell P B TC CF-SF GR-SHAPE
HE+ / qwen-1.5b 8.3 16.7 4.2 12.5 16.7
MBPP+ / qwen-1.5b 2.1 6.4 4.3 12.8 4.3
HE+ / qwen-0.5b-inst 5.0 10.0 7.5 17.5 5.0
MBPP+ / qwen-0.5b-inst 1.7 8.3 3.3 3.3 0.0
HE+ / deepseek-1.3b 0.0 6.8 10.2 3.4 3.4
MBPP+ / deepseek-1.3b 3.3 10.0 1.7 10.0 1.7
Pooled 2.8 9.0 5.2 9.0 3.8
39
