
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2607.12790

Who Grades the Grader?
Co-Evolving Evaluation Metrics and Skills for Self-Improving LLM Agents
Xing Zhang
1
, Guanghui Wang
1
, Yanwei Cui
1
, Ziyuan Li
2
, Wei Qiu
2
, Bing Zhu
2
, Peiyang He
1∗
1
AWS Generative AI Innovation Center
2
HSBC Holdings Plc., HSBC Technology Center, China
Abstract
Self-evolving agent systems create, revise, and retire their own
skills, but every such loop assumes a reliable evaluation metric
already exists. In many real applications none does. We show
the metric itself can be the evolving object: our loop searches
compositions of small typed drawback detectors under a full
evolutionary lifecycle, selecting for agreement with a ten-item
anchored reference set and regularizing by consensus over un-
labeled outputs. What evolves is the function that grades one
output, never the fixed task sets it is scored on, and what comes
out is an inspectable expression rather than an opaque judge.
It is also valid: on code generation it gains 0.21 agreement
with hidden ground truth on a locked set that metric selection
never reads (paired p = 0.014), beating the bare LLM judge
it contains. Validity is where safety lives: removing the anchor
guards collapses the metric into a vacuous always-pass detec-
tor while removing the detector lifecycle does not, inverting
the lesson from skill evolution. That collapse warns this line
of work that downstream task score cannot validate a self-
evolved evaluator, since the collapsed metric trains skills just
as well. Task score answers only sufficiency, and an evolved
metric suffices: Double Ratchet, co-evolving the metric with
a lifecycle-managed skill loop, retains 88–110% of the lift
ground truth or a hand-written rubric buys, across MBPP+,
Spider 2.0-Snow, and report generation. When evolved skills
gamed the report rubric, an independent judge caught it and
one added detector repaired it.
Introduction
Agent self-evolution is now a standard recipe: a frozen lan-
guage model is wrapped in a loop that writes skills, measures
their contribution, and retires the ones that hurt (Zhang et al.
2026b; Wang et al. 2024a; Shinn et al. 2023). Every round
consumes one expensive ingredient: an evaluation signal de-
ciding whether an attempt passed or failed. Unit tests supply
it free on code benchmarks; in deployed systems it is the
bottleneck. Industry products fill the gap by hand, one rubric
or demonstration at a time: Claude’s managed agents have
developers write outcome rubrics for a separate grader (An-
thropic 2026), and Codex’s Record & Replay has a human
demonstrate each workflow once (OpenAI 2026). This paper
automates that step.
1
∗
Corresponding author: peiyan@amazon.com
1
Code: https://github.com/amazon-science/Self-Evolving-
Agents-Double-Ratchet.
The question is direct: if skills can be evolved, why not
the metric? To our knowledge this is the first system to treat
the evaluation metric as a first-class evolving object under a
full evolutionary lifecycle in the sparse-anchor regime: no
evaluator exists to score the search, only ten anchored items
with golden references. Sparse is not unsupervised, and those
ten items are what the method turns on. Existing evolution-
ary search over objectives is scored by a downstream metric
assumed valid, and learned evaluators assume exactly the
ground truth we remove; here selection sees only agreement
with a ten-item anchor plus consensus over unlabeled out-
puts, and what comes out is an inspectable expression rather
than an opaque scalar.
Two clarifications determine how every result should be
read. First, the metric is the function that scores one solver
output, and it is the only thing that evolves: not the bench-
mark, whose tasks and references are fixed before any loop
starts, so no result here can come from an easier test. Second,
an evolved metric is judged on validity, not on the task
score it produces: agreement with a locked reference is the
claim, while how well skills trained on it perform is weaker
evidence, since a metric that passes everything still leaves
useful practice behind. That second point is not a caveat we
inherited but a result we measured, and it is strong enough
to constrain how this literature should run its experiments at
all.
Concretely (Figure 1), the metric is an expression tree over
a pool of small drawback detectors, each checking one fail-
ure class, synthesized from clustered failures, gated at birth,
scored by marginal contribution, and retired when useless.
One stance underpins the design: we rarely know what good
is, but given an output we can usually find drawbacks, so a
clean verdict means no known drawback was found, not certi-
fied correctness. That is what makes bootstrap possible, and
mostly deterministic detectors, which fail differently from
the LLM being graded, resist the shared-blind-spot collusion
a bare LLM judge invites. Because a metric grading the loop
that produced it is a Goodhart hazard (Goodhart 1984; Gao,
Schulman, and Hilton 2023), anchor discipline is strict: the
tiny dev set is the only supervised signal, and no part of
metric evolution reads the locked set.
The hypothesis comes from the skill side: Ratchet (Zhang
et al. 2026b,a) found unmanaged skill libraries drift and that
lifecycle management is what makes skill evolution work at
arXiv:2607.12790v2 [cs.AI] 30 Jul 2026

all. Do evaluators need the same discipline? Two ablations
judged on validity locate which ingredient carries the load,
and the answer is not the one the skill literature predicts. Of
our three task families, MBPP+ and Spider 2.0-Snow carry
exact ground truth, so validity and sufficiency are both mea-
surable; report generation is the intended target, having no
golden metric at all, and there we add the layer a deployment
would keep, an independent stronger judge comparing final
outputs pairwise against the pre-evolution baseline. That au-
dit caught a real Goodhart failure, and auditing the judge
exposed a second one. Verifier-free self-improvement is fea-
sible, but only inside an architecture that expects its own
metric to be gamed and its own judge miscalibrated, and can
catch both.
Our contributions are as follows.
• Metric evolution. We formulate the grading function,
rather than the task set, as the evolving object: anchored
search over compositions of atomic drawback detectors
under a full lifecycle of synthesis, birth gating, marginal-
contribution scoring, and retirement.
• An objective that works without a downstream met-
ric. Recall-weighted tiny-anchor agreement paired with
reliability-weighted consensus over unlabeled outputs, so
consensus regularizes transfer without ever selecting a
metric on its own.
• Where safety lives, and why task score cannot find it.
Anchor discipline, not the pool lifecycle, is load-bearing
for evaluators, inverting the skill-evolution lesson; and
since the collapsed metric matches the working one on
task score, validating a self-evolved evaluator by down-
stream performance is unsound, a caution for co-evolved-
judge designs generally.
• Double Ratchet. Co-evolution of the metric with a skill
loop, with evidence that an evolved metric suffices in
place of ground truth inside the loop, plus an end-to-end
Goodhart catch, its repair, and a judge audit.
Related Work
Three lines of work meet here, and in each the metric is what
our method does not get for free.
Self-evolving agents assume the metric. These agents
grow skill libraries, revise from failure traces, and bank
reusable experience (Wang et al. 2024a; Shinn et al. 2023;
Madaan et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024b;
Wang et al. 2024c; Park et al. 2023), a landscape two surveys
map (Zhang et al. 2025; Wang et al. 2024b), and a recent
wave evolves and benchmarks such libraries (Wu et al. 2025;
Yang et al. 2026; Xia et al. 2026; Ni et al. 2026; Zhang et al.
2026c; Wang, Ren, and Zhang 2026; Li et al. 2026). Ratchet
(Zhang et al. 2026b,a) showed unmanaged libraries drift and
that a minimal lifecycle of retirement, bounded capacity, and
meta-skill guidance restores the gains; that published loop
is adopted unchanged here as the skill-side component, not
a contribution of this work. Others search agent code itself,
in the tradition of neural architecture search (Hu, Lu, and
Clune 2025; Elsken, Metzen, and Hutter 2019), or optimize
prompts and pipelines (Khattab et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024;
Yuksekgonul et al. 2024; Fernando et al. 2024). All optimize
against a given evaluation signal. We evolve that signal, and
ask which part of the discipline carries the safety load once
the evaluator moves.
Searched objectives are scored by a metric that exists.
CSE-Autoloss evolves losses, AutoML-Zero whole learning
algorithms, Pruner-Zero pruning metrics, AlphaEvolve pro-
gram code against supplied evaluators (Liu et al. 2021; Real
et al. 2020; Dong et al. 2024a; Novikov et al. 2025). The
search space is analogous, primitives composed into a pro-
gram, but they evolve the artifact being graded and fitness
differs in kind: each is scored by a metric taken as valid,
AlphaEvolve stating outright that progress must be machine-
gradable, the precondition our regime lacks. This paper sup-
plies that missing foothold: anchored agreement plus con-
sensus in place of a downstream score. The distinction is not
cosmetic. When fitness is a trusted external number, a de-
generate candidate is caught by construction, since it simply
scores badly; when fitness is assembled from the candidate’s
own agreement with a ten-item anchor and with its peers, de-
generacy has to be excluded by explicit guards, which is why
the guards and not the lifecycle turn out to be load-bearing
here.
Learned graders trade the assumption for opacity. Re-
ward design is delicate even in classical RL (Ng, Harada, and
Russell 1999); learned reward models are over-optimized by
the policies they train, and misspecification produces system-
atic gaming (Ouyang et al. 2022; Gao, Schulman, and Hilton
2023; Pan, Bhatia, and Steinhardt 2022; Skalse et al. 2022;
Amodei et al. 2016), while AI-feedback and self-rewarding
setups let the model judge itself (Bai et al. 2022; Yuan et al.
2024). We share the hazard but not the structure: our grader
is a composition of typed detectors optimized to predict an
anchor it never trains on, so it can be read and repaired by
hand, and it is never a reward the agent optimizes directly.
LLM judges, and auditing them. LLM judges are stan-
dard evaluation infrastructure and widely audited for posi-
tion, verbosity, and self-preference bias (Zheng et al. 2023;
Dubois et al. 2023; Gu et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024a). We
confine LLM judgment to three narrow guarded roles: soft
labels on the ten dev items, one semantic-mismatch detec-
tor class, and a position-debiased pairwise audit outside all
loops. Agent-as-judge co-evolution (Zhuge et al. 2024) is
closest in spirit and validates the judge through the system
it grades, which our ablations show a vacuous grader also
passes. Our own results add a caution to this literature that
we could not have anticipated: the audit needs to know the
task’s output contract, or it will score a required format as a
defect (§The Goodhart Episode).
Reference-free evaluators for our task families. The
evaluators nearest our tasks fix in advance what we synthe-
size, gate, and retire. CodeScore (Dong et al. 2024b) predicts
functional correctness from the execution-labeled supervi-
sion we take to be missing, and SQLHD (Yang et al. 2025)
needs no ground truth but fixes a hand-authored family of
metamorphic relations (Chen, Cheung, and Yiu 1998). Ei-
ther could be registered as one typed op in our pool and would

Figure 1: The evaluation metric is the evolving object; the task sets are fixed and never altered. Center: from a frozen solver,
no metric, and ten anchored items (left), the metric loop synthesizes typed drawback detectors behind a birth gate, composes
them into an expression selected by anchor agreement and consensus, and curates the pool by marginal contribution. What
comes out is a readable expression, not a learned scalar. Right: the skill loop is Ratchet (Zhang et al. 2026b), adopted unchanged,
and the evolved metric grades its training, giving Double Ratchet. Bottom right: the splits metric evolution never trains on.
then compete for selection on the anchor like any other, so
we read them as components rather than competitors. Agen-
tic text-to-SQL pipelines (Deng et al. 2025) improve the
solver, an orthogonal axis: a better solver changes which fail-
ures remain, which is precisely the variable our detectability
analysis isolates.
Benchmarks. MBPP+ supplies unit-tested Python tasks
(Austin et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2023), in the execution-graded
tradition of HumanEval (Chen et al. 2021), and Spider 2.0
supplies enterprise text-to-SQL over real warehouses with
execution-based grading (Lei et al. 2025). We use both as
hard anchors for certifying an evolved metric rather than as
leaderboard entries: our solver is a single LLM call with no
tools or iteration, so absolute pass rates are far below what
agentic systems report and are not meant to be compared
with them.
Problem Setup
Let a task family come with tasks t and a frozen solver
mapping t to an output y. A metric M maps (t, y) to a
verdict in {pass, fail, abstain}. It is M that we search over,
with the tasks and references held fixed. Three disjoint splits
play the usual roles with one twist each.
• train, large and unlabeled: solver outputs here expose
where candidate metrics disagree or abstain, and in co-
evolution the evolved metric grades these tasks for the
skill loop. No reference of any kind is attached to a train
task.
• dev, tiny and anchored, ten items throughout: each carries
a golden reference against which a teacher emits soft
pass/fail labels, the only supervised signal any loop reads.
Those references are not themselves a metric, grading
only the ten tasks that carry them while the evolved metric
must grade arbitrary outputs on tasks that have none.
• test, locked against the metric: it holds the strongest avail-
able reference (unit tests, official execution comparison,
the report rubric), and no part of metric evolution reads
it, so metric-validity numbers are fully out of sample.
The skill loop is the one component that touches the locked
set, for held-out scoring and rollback, as published (Zhang
et al. 2026b) and kept unchanged because a deployed agent
rolls back against the cases it is judged on. The guaran-
tee is thus asymmetric, and it is worth being explicit about
which claim rests on which split. Metric-validity numbers
are strictly out of sample: nothing in synthesis, gating, selec-
tion, or retirement ever reads the locked set, so an agreement
figure there is an honest generalization estimate. Skill-side
task scores are not out of sample in the same sense: they are
the pass rate of a loop that rolls back on that set. They remain
comparable across arms because every arm rolls back iden-
tically against the same set, which is what the head-to-head
comparison uses them for, and they are never used to certify
a metric. Dev is deliberately small because sparse anchoring
is realistic: fresh labels in deployed systems arrive as a trickle
of demos and incident reviews, not as a labeled corpus.

Metrics as Compositions of Drawback Detectors
An op is an atomic drawback detector o(t, y, c) →
{drawback, clean, abstain} with c a shared context,
checking exactly one failure class and abstaining otherwise.
A task family starts from a handful covering its obvious fail-
ure modes, cheap to write by hand or have an LLM draft from
the spec, and the lifecycle grows the pool from there. Ops
come in three cost tiers: static ops parse the artifact, execu-
tion ops run it (sandbox for code, live warehouse for SQL),
and judge ops ask an LLM one narrow question. A fixed
non-evolving root per family validates basic structure (code
parses, a report has a title) and caches the parsed artifact the
other ops read.
A metric expression composes op verdicts with logical
operators. Writing v(e) ∈ {1, 0, ⊥} for the verdict of ex-
pression e on (t, y), where 1 denotes drawback, 0 denotes
clean, and ⊥ denotes abstain, the grammar is
e ::= o 
W
i≤k 
e
i
V
i≤k 
e
i 
¬e
 P
i≤k 
v(e
i
) ≥ K
  P
i≤k 
w
i 
v(e
i
) ≥ θ

, 
(1)
where | separates the alternative node forms rather than de-
noting disjunction: a node is a leaf op, a disjunction (a draw-
back if any child finds one), a conjunction (only if all children
agree), a negation, an unweighted K-of-k vote, or a weighted
vote against threshold θ, so applied recursively a metric is
a tree of such nodes. Abstaining children are excluded from
their combinator, and a node whose children all abstain ab-
stains itself. The output passes when the root finds no draw-
back, the final verdict being the fixed root conjoined with
the evolved expression. Ops are pure functions of (t, y), so
verdicts are cached, evaluation is a set of table lookups, and
a metric is reproducible from its expression string plus the
registered op pool. Negation and weighted votes stay avail-
able throughout, but every metric selected in our runs uses
only disjunction, conjunction, and votes.
Keeping the metric mostly deterministic is a safety choice
rather than an efficiency one. A bare LLM judge shares failure
modes with the LLM solver it grades, so the two can drift
into agreement before any optimization pressure exists, and
the agreement is invisible from the outside because there
is nothing to read. A composition of typed detectors fails
differently, one leaf at a time, and each leaf names the failure
class it fired on. That property is what turned a rubric-gaming
episode into a one-line diagnosis later in this paper.
The Metric Loop
Algorithm 1 sketches one round. Two signals feed synthesis:
misses, dev items the current metric passes although their
soft label is fail, and gaps, train outputs on which the op
pool abstains entirely or splits. Both are clustered by failure
class under a closed task-specific taxonomy, and a synthesizer
authors a typed op spec for any recurring cluster. A new op
must pass a birth gate: fire on at least half its cluster and
stay clean on known-good outputs. Ops born from anchored
misses enter active (selectable), their birth evidence already
tying them to the anchor; ops born only from unlabeled gaps
enter as shadows, which record verdicts every round but
cannot be selected, since nothing yet shows they track quality
rather than consensus noise. A shadow is promoted once its
verdicts raise dev agreement.
Candidates come from an LLM composer that sees the
op catalog, the current gaps, and an elite history of the
best expressions with their shortcomings, plus mutations and
crossovers of those elites. Selection keeps the best-so-far can-
didate by
S(e) = A
dev
(e) · A
train
(e)
w 
− λ C(e), 
(2)
where A
dev
(e) is e’s agreement with the dev soft labels,
A
train
(e) its agreement with the consensus verdict of the
opining pool ops on unlabeled train outputs, C(e) expression
size, and w, λ small constants. Consensus is the regularizer: a
metric memorizing ten dev items but behaving erratically on
the broad distribution loses, while a degenerate always-fail
metric loses on dev. Two guards apply: selection fails closed
(a candidate with no usable dev opinion is unselectable), and
a validity gate drops candidates that pass, fail, or abstain on
everything. Per-op fitness is the leave-one-out marginal of
the incumbent expression, and non-positive ops retire after
a grace period. Every constant, including the exponent w,
the complexity charges, and the grace length, is listed in
Appendix C.
Both agreement terms are weighted, each weighting a
safety choice rather than a tuning knob. Dev agreement is
recall-weighted: A
dev 
is the weighted mean of the two per-
class recalls, (w
f
r
fail 
+ w
p
r
pass
)/(w
f 
+ w
p
) with w
f 
= 2,
w
p 
= 1, over the items the metric opines on, so a missed
drawback costs twice a false alarm and no candidate reaches
A
dev 
= 1 by acing the easier class alone. Consensus is
reliability-weighted: each opining op’s vote is scaled by
1 + κ max(0, m
o
) for m
o 
that op’s anchored leave-one-
out marginal, so anchor-proven ops lead and unproven ops
vote near-neutrally. Otherwise a bloc of correlated detectors,
cheap to synthesize and liable to share a blind spot, would
define the very pseudo-label the regularizer rewards agreeing
with. A
train 
is thus a transfer regularizer pulled toward the
anchor, not a popularity vote, and entering multiplicatively
against a fail-closed A
dev 
it never selects a metric alone.
Co-Evolution with the Skill Loop: Double Ratchet
The skill loop adopted here (Zhang et al. 2026b) needs one
thing our setting does not supply: a grader for its training
tasks. Co-evolution hands it the current best evolved metric,
giving Double Ratchet (Figure 1). The loops alternate under
a fixed front-loaded curriculum, metric phases longest early
when coverage is worst: the evolved metric grades train at-
tempts, and failures become capsules whose error text feeds
skill synthesis. Held-out evaluation and the rollback anchor
stay pinned to the locked test set, which the evolved met-
ric never touches, so a corrupted metric slows skill learning
without corrupting the measurement. The comparison is the
reference skill loop, identical machinery handed the ground-
truth metric (or best available rubric) for free.
Two ablations, one per safety ingredient. The naive arm
disables the anchor guards (fail-closed anchoring, the va-
lidity gate, and skill-loop rollback) with the detector lifecy-
cle fully on, the collusion-prone configuration unanchored

Algorithm 1 One round of metric evolution. Only the au-
dit step reads the locked test set, and it never feeds back.
Constants and the full lifecycle are in Appendix C.
1: Sense (where is the metric wrong?)
2: misses ← dev items the incumbent passes but the soft
label fails
3: gaps ← train outputs where the pool abstains or splits
4: Grow (expand the op pool)
5: cluster misses ∪ gaps by failure class; author one typed
op per recurring cluster
6: birth gate: fires on ≥ half its cluster and clean on
known-good ⇒ admit ( active if anchored, else shadow )
7: Select (recombine, keep the best)
8: candidates ← LLM compositions over the pool, plus
mutations and crossovers of elites
9: keep arg max
e 
S(e) over candidates and the incum-
bent, behind the validity gate (Eq. 2)
10: Curate (merit-based lifecycle)
11: retire ops with non-positive leave-one-out marginal ;
promote shadow ops that raise dev agreement
12: Audit (measurement only, never a training signal)
13: report agreement against the locked test set
agent-judge co-evolution implicitly runs. The no-lifecycle
arm does the opposite, keeping the guards but disabling the
birth gate and merit-based retirement so every synthesized
detector enters active and nothing retires: the metric-side
analog of an unmanaged skill library. The two arms are de-
liberately not a factorial. Each isolates one ingredient against
an otherwise complete system, which is what a claim about
which ingredient is load-bearing needs; a fully crossed de-
sign would add an arm with neither guard nor lifecycle whose
collapse is already implied by the naive arm.
Independent final judge. Where no accurate metric ex-
ists, rubric scores are references and not truth, so a final audit
sits outside all loops: a stronger LLM compares each final
output pairwise against the pre-evolution baseline, judged
twice with positions swapped, a win counting only when
both orders agree. It mimics the human acceptance step a
deployment keeps, and exposed a proxy-gaming failure the
loops could not see. The judge is an audit and never a train-
ing signal: no gradient, capsule, hint, or selection decision
anywhere in the system reads it.
Experimental Setup
Task families. MBPP+ (Austin et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2023), Python function synthesis with hidden unit tests as the
hard anchor, and Spider 2.0-Snow (Lei et al. 2025), enter-
prise text-to-SQL over real Snowflake warehouses anchored
by official execution-result comparison, are the validation
tasks: their exact ground truth makes both metric validity
and the reference-loop match measurable. Report genera-
tion is the target task, a deployment-style workload in which
a pipeline writes analyst-report sections from audited evi-
dence cards. No golden metric exists for it: the available
rubric score (RAQS) plus golden demonstrations is a partial
reference signal, not ground truth. Task cards are in Ap-
pendix A; tables abbreviate the tasks as MBPP+, Spider, and
Report.
Hard-subset construction. For MBPP+ and Spider 2.0 we
screen every task with five frozen-solver samples, drop those
passed on every sample (no lift room), and stratify the rest by
screen pass rate. Splits are 60/10/40 for MBPP+, 59/10/40 for
Spider 2.0, and 73/10/48 for reports, whose tasks derive from
golden demonstrations and need no screening. Dev always
holds ten items, five clear failures and five clean positives.
The solver is a single direct LLM call with no tools, so
absolute numbers are not comparable to leaderboard agents.
Roles and models. All experiments use Claude models:
every in-loop role (solver, skill synthesizers, teachers, judge
ops) is Claude Opus 4.7, the sole exception being the report
task’s final judge, the stronger Claude Opus 4.8 kept outside
all loops. A same-family teacher is not a circular self-grader:
it compares candidate outputs against golden references on
dev rather than judging unaided, and never sees the locked
anchor. Skill loops run 100 rounds; co-evolution interleaves
metric phases of 15/8/5/2 rounds between four 25-round skill
phases, matching the reference loop’s skill budget. Every role
is bound per call from a role-to-model table, so repeating any
experiment under a different or mixed model assignment is
a configuration change rather than a code change; we hold
that table uniform here to keep the comparisons clean (Ap-
pendix H).
Results
The findings run along two axes, in a deliberate order: first
metric validity, agreement with a locked reference no part
of metric evolution reads, which is the claim and which the
guard ablations then localize; then task score, which we show
cannot certify a metric and so use only to ask whether an
evolved one suffices in place of ground truth. Each run uses
three seeds, reported as mean and sample standard deviation,
with loop comparisons adding the seed-level difference and
a 95% bootstrap interval. Three seeds and held-out sets of
tens of items make those means coarse, so metric claims
are also tested paired, exact McNemar over matched per-
item verdicts, since evolution rescores the same locked items
and two rounds differ only in the grader. That test pools three
seeds over one 40-item set, so its unit is the seed-item verdict,
not an independent task: it shows the change of grader is not
noise, not a task-level population effect. Per-round noise runs
near five points, so we report peak and final-rounds values
(mean of the last ten) against each run’s round-0 baseline.
Peak is a locked-set argmax and so optimistic; the final-
rounds column is fixed in advance and is the unselected
estimate, which is why the paired test is run at both. Bold
rows are our proposed configuration.
The Evolved Metric Lifts and Transfers
Figure 2c is the mechanism made concrete: every distinct
metric the MBPP+ loop selected, in order, as the expression

Task Seed Born Rejected Pool In metric
MBPP+ 10 2–4 997–1014 12–14 3
Spider 9 24–30 612–785 33–39 1–2
Report 11 11–15 172–188 22–26 2
Table 1: The birth gate rejects orders of magnitude more
detectors than it admits, and selection composes only one
to three survivors. Metric-loop op lifecycle, anchored arm,
100 rounds. Seed: hand-authored detectors. Born: synthe-
sized and admitted during the run. Pool: seed plus born. In
metric: leaves in the final expression. Three-seed min–max;
a bare number means all seeds agree. Skill-side counterpart:
Table 6 in Appendix F.
it actually is. The objective rises from 0.16 to 0.52 while the
expression shrinks from six ops to three, the lifecycle work-
ing as designed rather than a search accumulating checks,
and the birth gate is the busy part, 998 candidate detectors
rejected against 2 admitted on this seed. Table 1 puts that
ratio in context across tasks: the pools stay small, the gate
does most of the work, and the selected expression is one to
three leaves everywhere. What rises monotonically is what
selection optimizes: best-so-far selection makes S(e) never
fall, on all nine runs (full 100-round budget, early stopping
off, last improvement by round 63). Held-out agreement,
which selection never sees, is not monotone: five of nine
runs end below their own mid-run peak, the ordinary gen-
eralization gap of optimizing a ten-item proxy, and why we
report the locked column instead of selecting on it. Conver-
gence is always to a composition: (any spec_mismatch
crash returns_not_print_only) on MBPP+ and
two-op forms such as (any missing_group_by
spec_sql_mismatch) elsewhere (Appendix E).
What the lift is measured against. These compositions
beat the bare LLM judge op they contain, the natural base-
line for a grader built without ground truth: peak agree-
ment 0.625 ± 0.050 versus 0.55 ± 0.04 on MBPP+ and
0.500 ± 0.026 versus 0.45 ± 0.07 on Spider (no ground truth
exists to score a standalone judge on Report). Round 0 brack-
ets the evolved metric from the other side, being the hand-
authored seed composition, at 0.417 ± 0.058 on MBPP+, so
the +0.21 over it is lift over static engineering rather than
lift over nothing. Two baselines would split the remaining
credit and neither is run here: a prompt-tuned judge on the
same ten items, which would separate anchored composition
from anchored prompting, and random composition in place
of the LLM composer, which would separate the composer
from the search space it draws on.
Three tasks, three roles. The tasks are not three attempts
at one claim. MBPP+ is the positive case, the only measurable
held-out lift; Report starts at ceiling from round 0, where
subset seeding already supplies a near-optimal composition,
so it carries sufficiency and the safety ablations rather than
lift; Spider sits near chance despite a robust objective climb,
the detectability boundary taken up in §The Detectability
Spectrum. Absolute agreement is not comparable across the
three, since each sits on its own locked set with its own
reference and class balance, which is why the within-task
Spider contrast carries the detectability claim and a cross-
task ranking would not.
The lift survives a paired test. On MBPP+ the paired
test puts the lift beyond seed noise: across 120 matched ver-
dicts, evolution corrects 61 items against 36 broken at peak
(p = 0.014) and 36 against 20 at the end (p = 0.044), ev-
ery seed net positive. It finds nothing on Spider, that task’s
regime rather than a sample-size artifact, since the same test
on the same set size detects the MBPP+ effect. Nor is the ten-
item anchor fragile: replaying report selection offline on 200
stratified subsamples per size, rescoring every candidate the
live run considered, gives held-out agreement 0.871±0.063,
0.882 ± 0.051, and 0.874 ± 0.041 at four, six, and eight an-
chored items against 0.854 at the full ten. Smaller anchors
are noisier but their means do not fall, so recall weighting
plus the consensus regularizer keep even a four-item anchor
off degenerate metrics. The standard deviations tell the oper-
ational story: any single four-item anchor is a lottery, while
the mean over draws shows selection is not leaning on one
marginal item (protocol in Appendix G).
Which Guard Carries the Load, and Why Task
Score Cannot Tell
Table 2 contrasts three arms of the report metric loop, where
the anchor is softest and collusion pressure highest. Dis-
abling the anchor guards (naive) collapses the metric on
three of three seeds: selection latches onto a detector that al-
most never fires, fail-open scoring reports a vacuous perfect
objective, and the metric passes 0.97–1.00 of everything it
grades. Disabling the lifecycle does not: objectives and held-
out agreement stay in the anchored band, and although the
pool grows (23–31 ops against 22–26 anchored), the extra
ops are inert, since an op never selected never grades any-
thing. This inverts the skill-evolution literature’s emphasis:
for skills, lifecycle management is the key finding; for evalu-
ators under anchored selection, anchor discipline carries the
safety load, so the metric-side analog of library drift is anchor
drift, not pool drift. Structurally, a junk skill gets routed into
prompts and hurts, while a junk op matters only if selection
picks it. The lifecycle is not therefore worthless: it keeps the
pool and its per-round verdict cost bounded (Table 1). It is
simply not what stands between this system and a worthless
grader.
The collapsed arm also carries a warning past this paper,
drawn out in Figure 3. Its metric is worthless, yet its co-loop
scores as well as the anchored one and on two tasks slightly
better (Table 3). Neither number is wrong: an always-pass
metric reduces training to unfiltered practice, which on its
own improves skills, and measurement never passes through
the metric, so the score survives what the grader does not.
The consequence is methodological. Downstream task per-
formance cannot validate a self-evolved evaluator, and the
experiment this literature reaches for first, co-evolve a judge
with a policy and report that the policy improved, would
have certified a grader that passes everything. Validating the
evaluator needs a held-out reference it never reads, as above,

Figure 2: An evolved metric buys most of the lift ground truth would have, and what evolves stays readable. (a) Lift Double
Ratchet retains as a fraction of the reference loop’s; 100% means the evolved metric bought everything ground truth would have.
(b) Locked-set learning curves (mean ± std, three seeds): reference loop orange, Double Ratchet blue, frozen solver dotted. (c)
Every distinct metric the MBPP+ loop selected, in order. The objective rises while the expression shortens from six ops to three;
the locked column is reported, never read. Numbers from Tables 3 and 4.
Arm Objective Held-out Train Outcome
anchored 0.865±0.002 0.830±0.012 .78–.82 composes
naive 1.000 (vacuous) fail-open .97–1.0 collapses
no-lifecycle 0.896±0.072 0.868±0.061 n/a no collapse
Table 2: Removing the anchor guards collapses the metric
into a vacuous always-pass grader; removing the lifecy-
cle does not. Metric-validity ablations on report generation,
final-rounds values over three seeds. Objective: the selection
score of Eq. 2. Held-out: agreement with the locked refer-
ence. Train: fraction of training attempts the metric passes.
The naive arm scores 1.000 because fail-open scoring credits
a detector that never fires; it passes essentially everything, so
its held-out entry is a behavior rather than a number. Which
guard each arm disables is specified in Appendix C.
which is also what a deployment triaging or gating on it
depends on.
The asymmetry is worth stating in both directions, because
it is easy to over-read. A high task score does not certify the
grader, as the naive arm shows. But a low task score does not
condemn one either, since a grader can be right and still drive
a loop into a capability ceiling it cannot reach, which is what
happens on Spider below. Task score and metric validity are
simply different measurements of different objects, and the
practice of substituting the first for the second is what we are
arguing against.
Co-Evolution: Is the Evolved Metric Sufficient?
With validity established independently (§Which Guard Car-
ries the Load), the remaining question is sufficiency: can a
metric evolved from ten reference examples drive a skill
loop that ground truth would otherwise drive? It can. Double
Ratchet retains 106%, 110%, and 88% of the reference loop’s
lift on MBPP+, Spider, and Report (Table 3; Figure 2a–b):
within noise on the ground-truth tasks, and a small gap where
the reference is itself a partial rubric, which is why the inde-
pendent final judge below carries more weight there. Table 4
gives the underlying init / peak / final-rounds triples, and
the ordering of arms at the unselected final-rounds column
matches the ordering at peak, so retention is not an artifact
of taking an argmax on the locked set.
Spider’s absolute lift is smallest for both loops in Figure 2b,
one ceiling binding them alike: a single-call solver’s residual
failures mostly need live exploration no guidance-text skill

Figure 3: Metric validity and downstream task score dissociate, so task score cannot certify a self-evolved grader. The
same three report-generation arms, measured two ways. (a) Metric validity on an absolute 0-to-1 scale against a locked reference
no metric loop reads: the arms separate sharply, and the naive arm is vacuous rather than merely worse. (b) The task score of
the skill loop each grader trained, on a zoomed axis: all three land within .038, and the worthless grader is the higher of the two
co-evolved arms. Both readings are correct, which is the problem: certifying a grader by the performance of the policy it trained
would have certified the hatched bar. Values from Tables 2 and 3.
expresses. Aggregates also hide a task-level result: both loops
solve held-out problems the frozen solver never solves, and
on both hard-anchor tasks Double Ratchet converts more of
them than the reference loop (Table 3, Improved). That settles
how good a metric must be to suffice here: not very. Spider’s
metric agrees with ground truth only at 0.500 ± 0.026 yet
its co-loop retains the full reference lift, because the metric’s
training role is directional: it decides which attempts become
failure capsules, whose concrete error text does not depend
on the label being perfect. Metric-graded training accuracy
stays in a realistic band (0.78–0.82 on Report, 0.41–0.83 on
Spider), so the metric is really grading, and a weak one slows
learning without corrupting measurement.
That robustness has a sharp edge, visible on Spider at the
seed level: two of three co-evolution seeds selected a weak
single-op metric with train agreement 0.41–0.44, yet reached
peak evaluations of 0.45–0.50, indistinguishable from the
sibling seed carrying a two-op metric (Appendix G). A skill
loop is a forgiving consumer of grades. The reasons to build
a metric well therefore lie elsewhere, in the uses a skill loop
does not exercise: triage, where a grader decides which out-
puts a human sees; gating, where it decides which ship; and
repairability, where its structure decides whether a failure
can be localized at all. The next subsection puts repairability
under load.
The Goodhart Episode and the Final-Judge 2×2
The report task produced the paper’s most instructive se-
quence (Table 5), the clearest evidence that an inspectable
metric is worth having. The rubric’s metric-discipline di-
mension counts inline evidence tags, and the first skill runs
raised the rubric score by +0.26 partly by gaming exactly
this: evolved skills wrote the tag in place of the number
(about 30% of tags at peak rounds had no value beside them)
and invented confident forecasts for a style dimension. The
independent judge preferred the baseline in 88% of decided
pairs, citing unrendered placeholders and fabrication. This
is a fact about the setup rather than about our system: the
rubric was the best available reference signal on this task,
hand-written by the pipeline’s authors, and gamed within a
hundred rounds by skills optimizing against it. Any design
that treats such a rubric as ground truth inherits that outcome
silently.
The repair was one coupled change: a vocabulary-aware
value-erasure check in the capsule gate (a tag whose regis-
tered metric has a numeric value but no numeral nearby is
a defect) plus the failure hints that teach value-plus-tag, the
hint being how the detector’s verdict reaches synthesis. We
claim the pair, not the detector alone, since separating them
needs a detector-only and hints-only rerun we did not do.
The rerun cut erased tags to about 1% while the rubric score
rose to 0.850 ± 0.010, so nothing was traded away for the fix.
Reading the metric is what localized the defect to a name-
able check, an intervention a learned scalar does not admit: a

MBPP+ Spider Report
Peak: skill 0.700±0.025 0.483±0.038 0.850±0.010
Peak: co 0.717±0.038 0.458±0.038 0.812±0.006
Peak: co naive
† 
0.742±0.014 0.458±0.029 0.841±0.003
Lift retention (co) 106% 110% 88%
∆peak (co − skill) +.02 −.03 −.04
95% CI [−.03, .06] [−.08, .03] [−.05, −.03]
Improved: skill 16/23 4/12 99%
Improved: co 19/23 6/12 99%
Table 3: Double Ratchet retains 88–110% of the lift
ground truth or a hand-written rubric would have
bought. Held-out task score, three seeds, 40–48-item locked
sets. skill: the reference loop, trained on ground truth
(MBPP+, Spider) or the best-available rubric (Report). co:
Double Ratchet. co naive: the anchor-guards-off ablation,
seed-matched to co, whose metric is vacuous (
†
; Table 2) yet
scores as well, which is why this table answers sufficiency but
cannot certify a grader (Figure 3). Lift retention: co’s peak
lift over round 0 as a fraction of skill’s. ∆peak: the seed-level
difference with a 95% bootstrap CI, containing zero on both
ground-truth tasks. Improved: never-passed tasks solved at
least once, or (Report) sections ending above round 0.
reward model that had absorbed the same rubric would have
shown a number going up, with no place to put the repair.
The judge itself then needed auditing. The pipeline re-
quires raw evidence tags in its output, a format contract the
original generic rubric did not know, so its loss rationales
blamed that syntax and the repair barely moved the win rate
(0.122 to 0.126). A task-aware rubric stating the contract,
still treating valueless tags and fabricated figures as defects,
re-judged the same stored pairs: down that column the fix
moves the win rate from 0.515 (271 of 526 decided) to 0.770
(435 of 565), real content quality, while across each row
the jump measures convention-blindness. That rubric was
written after reading the generic judge’s rationales, so it di-
agnoses the audit rather than independently confirming the
repair; its pre-repair cell is the control, both cells re-judging
identical stored outputs. Both directions matter: self-evolved
metrics need an outer audit, and the audit needs the task con-
tract. A deployment that had stopped at the generic column
would have concluded the repair did nothing and reverted it.
The Detectability Spectrum
One variable organizes the results above: how mechani-
cally detectable the solver’s failures are. MBPP+ failures
are crashes and wrong outputs cheap ops see directly, and
reports have a closed failure taxonomy behind their anchor
(Appendix B), so transfer is strong on both. Spider 2.0 turns
that into an in-task controlled contrast. Under our first prompt
most failures were compile errors and the evolved metric
reached 0.85 held-out agreement, but grounding the prompt
with typed schemas raised the solver’s baseline by half and
left residual failures that are semantically wrong values un-
der clean execution, invisible to deterministic ops, so agree-
ment fell to 0.500 ± 0.026 even as the objective lifted. Same
Task Loop Init Peak End
MBPP+ skill 0.275±0.050 0.700±0.025 0.592±0.039
co 0.267±0.038 0.717±0.038 0.652±0.034
co naive 0.317±0.058 0.742±0.014 0.632±0.023
Spider skill 0.317±0.038 0.483±0.038 0.327±0.010
co 0.275±0.043 0.458±0.038 0.323±0.038
co naive 0.292±0.052 0.458±0.029 0.343±0.028
Report skill 0.562±0.001 0.850±0.010 0.802±0.024
co 0.557±0.006 0.812±0.006 0.767±0.015
co naive 0.559±0.003 0.841±0.003 0.811±0.015
Table 4: The arms stay ordered at the unselected End
column exactly as at peak, so retention is not an artifact
of the peak argmax. Per-loop scores behind Table 3, mean ±
std over three seeds. Init is round 0, Peak the best round on the
locked set, End the mean of each run’s last ten rounds. Frozen
single-call baselines are ≈0.27 (MBPP+), 0.285 (Spider 2.0),
and 0.56 (Report). Bold rows are our proposed configuration.
Generic judge Task-aware judge
pre-repair (gamed proxy) 0.122 0.515
post-repair (erasure fixed) 0.126 0.770
Table 5: Reading down a column shows what the repair
bought; reading across a row shows how much the judge
penalized a required output format. Final-judge win rate
of evolved report outputs over their pre-evolution baselines,
over decided pairs (both position orders agreeing); ties are
39–50% of the 864 pre-repair and 1,056 post-repair pairs.
All four cells re-judge the same stored outputs. Both rubrics
and the pairing protocol are in Appendix D.
method, same task, different failure distribution: a semantic
regime shifts the burden onto judge ops and outer audits,
and the sharper the solver, the more of this regime is left.
What evolves stays legible either way, which is what made
the repair possible.
Figure 4 lays the three task families on that axis and keeps
the controlled comparison separate from the cross-task place-
ment, because only the former is a measurement. The place-
ment of MBPP+, Report, and Spider on the spectrum is an
interpretation of where each family’s failures sit; their agree-
ment numbers are not comparable to one another, since each
is computed against a different locked reference on a different
set. The Spider band underneath is the actual evidence: one
task, one method, two solver prompts, and the metric’s held-
out agreement moving from 0.85 to 0.500 as the residual
failures move from mechanical to semantic.
The practical reading is a scoping rule. Where failures are
mechanically checkable, cheap deterministic detectors carry
the metric and an evolved composition transfers; where they
are purely semantic, the composition still evolves and still
names what it finds, but its agreement with truth is bounded
by the judge ops inside it, and the outer audit stops being
optional. The uncomfortable corollary is that this boundary
moves in the direction of harder, not easier: every improve-

Figure 4: Whether an evolved metric transfers is governed by how mechanically detectable the solver’s failures are.
Top: the three task families on the axis from mechanically checkable failures to purely semantic ones, each with its evolved
metric’s peak held-out agreement. Those three numbers sit on three different references, so the placement is an interpretation,
not a measurement. Middle, the measurement: a within-task Spider 2.0-Snow contrast. Grounding the solver prompt with typed
schemas pushes the residual failures from compile errors into clean-executing wrong values, and the same metric loop’s held-out
agreement falls from 0.85 to 0.500. Bottom: what each end of the axis implies for practice.
ment to the solver retires the failures a static op could catch
and leaves behind the ones only judgment can.
Discussion
The anchor cannot be manufactured. Evolution expands
coverage but never creates ground truth. With no anchor the
loop optimizes noise, which is what the naive arm demon-
strates from the inside: remove the guards that tie selection to
ten real labels and the search finds the cheapest way to look
perfect. Anchor quality therefore matters as much as its exis-
tence, and hardening soft anchors into checkable ones is the
highest-leverage investment available. Ten items is few; ten
items with golden references and a strict soft-labeling pro-
tocol were enough on all three families, and the subsample
replay says four would often have been.
Validity and sufficiency are different questions. The two
axes of the results section are not two views of one number.
Sufficiency asks whether a loop trained on the evolved metric
reaches where ground truth would take it, and the answer is
largely yes, because a skill loop consumes grades direction-
ally. Validity asks whether the grader is right, and it is the
question every use outside a training loop turns on. Conflat-
ing them is not a philosophical error but a measurable one:
Figure 3 shows a grader that answers the first well and the
second not at all.
Where the method helps. Metric evolution buys the most
where the solver’s failures are mechanically detectable, as
the within-task Spider contrast quantifies (§The Detectability
Spectrum). It buys least where they are semantic, and there
its value shifts from agreement to legibility: an expression
that names its verdicts supports triage and repair even when
it barely beats chance at predicting truth.
Limitations
This is a mechanism study, not a scaling result. Three task
families spanning the detectability axis including its negative
end, one model family, rounds in the low hundreds, and
held-out sets of tens of items, though graded every round
by every candidate (52,600 item-level verdicts against the
locked reference and 5,743 birth-gate decisions). Nothing in
the design is model-specific, and every LLM role is bound
from a configuration table, but we have not run a cross-family
replication and cannot claim one.
Several specific gaps are worth naming. Teacher quality
is held fixed, so how anchor quality degrades with a weaker
teacher is untested. The paired McNemar test pools seeds
over a single 40-item locked set, so it licenses a claim about
graders, not about tasks. Peak values are locked-set argmaxes

and therefore optimistic, which is why the final-rounds col-
umn, fixed in advance, is reported beside them everywhere.
The Goodhart repair is claimed as a coupled pair of detec-
tor and hints, since we did not run the detector-only and
hints-only arms that would separate them. The task-aware
rubric was written after reading the generic judge’s ratio-
nales, so it is a diagnosis and not an independent confirma-
tion. Guidance-text skills cannot substitute for capabilities
that need interaction, such as live schema exploration, which
is the ceiling Spider’s absolute lift runs into for both loops.
And metamorphic detectors (Chen, Cheung, and Yiu 1998),
the natural next op family for exactly the semantic regime
where our current pool is weakest, are built but unexercised
here.
Conclusion
The evaluation metric can itself be the evolving object, and it
evolves into something valid: +0.21 held-out agreement on
MBPP+ against a locked reference no part of selection reads,
ahead of the bare judge it contains, and beyond seed noise
under a paired test. Anchor discipline, not the pool lifecy-
cle, makes that hold, inverting the lesson the skill-evolution
literature would predict, and the arm without it warns that
task score certifies nothing, a worthless metric training skills
just as well. Read for sufficiency rather than validity, Double
Ratchet retains 88–110% of the supervised lift across code,
enterprise SQL, and report writing. On the one task where
no golden metric exists, an outer judge caught the loop gam-
ing its own reference, one detector plus its hints repaired it
without cost to the score, and auditing the judge caught the
audit mistaking a required output format for a defect. Who
grades the grader: an anchor it predicts but never sees, and
an outside judge that must itself be checked.
References
Amodei, D.; Olah, C.; Steinhardt, J.; Christiano, P.; Schul-
man, J.; and Mané, D. 2016. Concrete Problems in AI Safety.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565.
Anthropic. 2026. New in Claude Managed Agents: Dream-
ing, Outcomes, and Multiagent Orchestration. https://
claude.com/blog/new-in-claude-managed-agents. Product
announcement, May 19, 2026.
Austin, J.; Odena, A.; Nye, M.; Bosma, M.; Michalewski, H.;
Dohan, D.; Jiang, E.; Cai, C.; Terry, M.; Le, Q.; and Sutton,
C. 2021. Program Synthesis with Large Language Models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732.
Bai, Y.; Kadavath, S.; Kundu, S.; Askell, A.; Kernion, J.;
Jones, A.; Chen, A.; Goldie, A.; Mirhoseini, A.; McKinnon,
C.; et al. 2022. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI
Feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073.
Chen, G. H.; Chen, S.; Liu, Z.; Jiang, F.; and Wang, B. 2024a.
Humans or LLMs as the Judge? A Study on Judgement Bias.
In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Chen, M.; Li, Y.; Yang, Y.; Yu, S.; Lin, B.; and He, X.
2024b. AutoManual: Generating Instruction Manuals by
LLM Agents via Interactive Environmental Learning. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
ume 37.
Chen, M.; Tworek, J.; Jun, H.; Yuan, Q.; Pinto, H. P. d. O.;
Kaplan, J.; Edwards, H.; Burda, Y.; Joseph, N.; Brockman,
G.; et al. 2021. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained
on Code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374.
Chen, T. Y.; Cheung, S. C.; and Yiu, S. M. 1998. Meta-
morphic Testing: A New Approach for Generating Next Test
Cases. Technical Report HKUST-CS98-01, Hong Kong Uni-
versity of Science and Technology.
Deng, M.; Ramachandran, A.; Xu, C.; Hu, L.; Yao, Z.; Datta,
A.; and Zhang, H. 2025. ReFoRCE: A Text-to-SQL Agent
with Self-Refinement, Consensus Enforcement, and Column
Exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00675.
Dong, P.; Li, L.; Tang, Z.; Liu, X.; Pan, X.; Wang, Q.; and
Chu, X. 2024a. Pruner-Zero: Evolving Symbolic Pruning
Metric from Scratch for Large Language Models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML).
Dong, Y.; Ding, J.; Jiang, X.; Li, G.; Li, Z.; and Jin, Z. 2024b.
CodeScore: Evaluating Code Generation by Learning Code
Execution. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and
Methodology.
Dubois, Y.; Li, X.; Taori, R.; Zhang, T.; Gulrajani, I.; Ba,
J.; Guestrin, C.; Liang, P.; and Hashimoto, T. B. 2023. Al-
pacaFarm: A Simulation Framework for Methods that Learn
from Human Feedback. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36.
Elsken, T.; Metzen, J. H.; and Hutter, F. 2019. Neural Ar-
chitecture Search: A Survey. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 20(55): 1–21.
Fernando, C.; Banarse, D.; Michalewski, H.; Osindero, S.;
and Rocktäschel, T. 2024. Promptbreeder: Self-Referential
Self-Improvement via Prompt Evolution. In Proceedings
of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML).
Gao, L.; Schulman, J.; and Hilton, J. 2023. Scaling Laws
for Reward Model Overoptimization. In Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 10835–10866.
Goodhart, C. A. E. 1984. Problems of Monetary Manage-
ment: The UK Experience. Monetary Theory and Practice:
The UK Experience, 91–121.
Gu, J.; Jiang, X.; Shi, Z.; Tan, H.; Zhai, X.; Xu, C.; Li, W.;
Shen, Y.; Ma, S.; Liu, H.; Wang, S.; Zhang, K.; Wang, Y.;
Gao, W.; Ni, L.; and Guo, J. 2024. A Survey on LLM-as-a-
Judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15594.
Hu, S.; Lu, C.; and Clune, J. 2025. Automated Design of
Agentic Systems. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).
Khattab, O.; Singhvi, A.; Maheshwari, P.; Zhang, Z.; San-
thanam, K.; Vardhamanan, S.; Haq, S.; Sharma, A.; Joshi,
T. T.; Moazam, H.; Miller, H.; Zaharia, M.; and Potts, C.
2024. DSPy: Compiling Declarative Language Model Calls
into Self-Improving Pipelines. In International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR).

Lei, F.; Chen, J.; Ye, Y.; Cao, R.; Shin, D.; Su, H.; Suo,
Z.; Gao, H.; Hu, W.; Yin, P.; Zhong, V.; Xiong, C.; Sun,
R.; Liu, Q.; Wang, S.; and Yu, T. 2025. Spider 2.0: Evaluat-
ing Language Models on Real-World Enterprise Text-to-SQL
Workflows. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (ICLR).
Li, X.; Chen, W.; Liu, Y.; Zheng, S.; Chen, X.; He, Y.; Li,
Y.; You, B.; Shen, H.; Sun, J.; et al. 2026. SkillsBench:
Benchmarking how well agent skills work across diverse
tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12670.
Liu, J.; Xia, C. S.; Wang, Y.; and Zhang, L. 2023. Is Your
Code Generated by ChatGPT Really Correct? Rigorous Eval-
uation of Large Language Models for Code Generation. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
ume 36.
Liu, P.; Zhang, G.; Wang, B.; Xu, H.; Liang, X.; Jiang, Y.; and
Li, Z. 2021. Loss Function Discovery for Object Detection
via Convergence-Simulation Driven Search. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Madaan, A.; Tandon, N.; Gupta, P.; Hallinan, S.; Gao, L.;
Wiegreffe, S.; Alon, U.; Dziri, N.; Prabhumoye, S.; Yang,
Y.; et al. 2023. Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with Self-
Feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 36.
Ng, A. Y.; Harada, D.; and Russell, S. 1999. Policy Invariance
Under Reward Transformations: Theory and Application to
Reward Shaping. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
Ni, J.; Liu, Y.; Liu, X.; Sun, Y.; Zhou, M.; Cheng, P.; Wang,
D.; Jiang, X.; and Jiang, G. 2026. Trace2Skill: Parallel In-
ductive Skill Distillation for LLM Agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2603.25158.
Novikov, A.; V˜u, N.; Eisenberger, M.; Dupont, E.; Huang,
P.-S.; Wagner, A. Z.; Shirobokov, S.; Kozlovskii, B.; Ruiz, F.
J. R.; Mehrabian, A.; Kumar, M. P.; See, A.; Chaudhuri, S.;
Holland, G.; Davies, A.; Nowozin, S.; Kohli, P.; and Balog,
M. 2025. AlphaEvolve: A Coding Agent for Scientific and
Algorithmic Discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131.
OpenAI. 2026. Codex: Record & Replay. https://developers.
openai.com/codex/record-and-replay. Developer documen-
tation.
Ouyang, L.; Wu, J.; Jiang, X.; Almeida, D.; Wainwright, C.;
Mishkin, P.; Zhang, C.; Agarwal, S.; Slama, K.; Ray, A.;
Schulman, J.; Hilton, J.; Kelton, F.; Miller, L.; Simens, M.;
Askell, A.; Welinder, P.; Christiano, P.; Leike, J.; and Lowe,
R. 2022. Training Language Models to Follow Instructions
with Human Feedback. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 35: 27730–27744.
Pan, A.; Bhatia, K.; and Steinhardt, J. 2022. The Effects
of Reward Misspecification: Mapping and Mitigating Mis-
aligned Models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).
Park, J. S.; O’Brien, J. C.; Cai, C. J.; Morris, M. R.; Liang,
P.; and Bernstein, M. S. 2023. Generative Agents: Interactive
Simulacra of Human Behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology.
Real, E.; Liang, C.; So, D.; and Le, Q. 2020. AutoML-Zero:
Evolving Machine Learning Algorithms From Scratch. In
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML), 8007–8019.
Shinn, N.; Cassano, F.; Gopinath, A.; Narasimhan, K.; and
Yao, S. 2023. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Re-
inforcement Learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 36.
Skalse, J.; Howe, N.; Krasheninnikov, D.; and Krueger, D.
2022. Defining and Characterizing Reward Gaming. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35: 9460–
9471.
Wang, G.; Xie, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Mandlekar, A.; Xiao, C.; Zhu,
Y.; Fan, L.; and Anandkumar, A. 2024a. Voyager: An
Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Mod-
els. Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
Wang, J.; Ren, Y.; and Zhang, H. 2026. From Procedural
Skills to Strategy Genes: Towards Experience-Driven Test-
Time Evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.15097.
Wang, L.; Ma, C.; Feng, X.; Zhang, Z.; Yang, H.; Zhang, J.;
Chen, Z.; Tang, J.; Chen, X.; Lin, Y.; Zhao, W. X.; Wei, Z.;
and Wen, J. 2024b. A Comprehensive Survey of LLM-Based
Autonomous Agents. Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6).
Wang, Z. Z.; Mao, J.; Fried, D.; and Neubig, G. 2024c. Agent
Workflow Memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07429.
Wu, R.; Wang, X.; Mei, J.; Cai, P.; Fu, D.; Yang, C.; Wen,
L.; Yang, X.; Shen, Y.; Wang, Y.; et al. 2025. Self-Evolving
LLM Agents through an Experience-Driven Lifecycle. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.16079.
Xia, P.; Chen, J.; Wang, H.; Liu, J.; Zeng, K.; Wang, Y.;
Han, S.; Zhou, Y.; Zhao, X.; Chen, H.; et al. 2026. SkillRL:
Evolving Agents via Recursive Skill-Augmented Reinforce-
ment Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08234.
Yang, B.; Xia, Y.; Sun, W.; and Liu, Y. 2025. Hallu-
cination Detection for LLM-based Text-to-SQL Genera-
tion via Two-Stage Metamorphic Testing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.22250.
Yang, C.; Wang, X.; Lu, Y.; Liu, H.; Le, Q. V.; Zhou, D.; and
Chen, X. 2024. Large Language Models as Optimizers. In
International Conference on Learning Representations.
Yang, Y.; Li, J.; Pan, Q.; Zhan, B.; Cai, Y.; Du, L.;
Zhou, J.; Chen, K.; Chen, Q.; Li, X.; et al. 2026. Au-
toSkill: Experience-Driven Lifelong Learning via Skill Self-
Evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.01145.
Yuan, W.; Pang, R. Y.; Cho, K.; Li, X.; Sukhbaatar, S.; Xu,
J.; and Weston, J. 2024. Self-Rewarding Language Mod-
els. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML).
Yuksekgonul, M.; Bianchi, F.; Boen, J.; Liu, S.; Huang, Z.;
Guestrin, C.; and Zou, J. 2024. TextGrad: Automatic “Dif-
ferentiation” via Text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496.
Zhang, J.; Qu, C.; Fang, J.; et al. 2025. A Survey of Self-
Evolving Agents: On Path to Artificial Super Intelligence.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21046.
Zhang, X.; Cui, Y.; Wang, G.; Li, Z.; Qiu, W.; Zhu, B.; and
He, P. 2026a. Library Drift: Diagnosing and Fixing a Silent

Failure Mode in Self-Evolving LLM Skill Libraries. In ICML
2026 Workshop on Failure Modes in Agentic AI.
Zhang, X.; Cui, Y.; Wang, G.; Li, Z.; Qiu, W.; Zhu, B.; and
He, P. 2026b. Ratchet: A Minimal Hygiene Recipe for Self-
Evolving LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.22148.
Zhang, X.; Wang, G.; Cui, Y.; Qiu, W.; Li, Z.; Zhu, B.; and
He, P. 2026c. Experience Compression Spectrum: Unifying
Memory, Skills, and Rules in LLM Agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.15877.
Zhao, A.; Huang, D.; Xu, Q.; Lin, M.; Liu, Y.-J.; and Huang,
G. 2024. ExpeL: LLM Agents Are Experiential Learners.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence.
Zheng, L.; Chiang, W.-L.; Sheng, Y.; Zhuang, S.; Wu, Z.;
Zhuang, Y.; Lin, Z.; Li, Z.; Li, D.; Xing, E. P.; Zhang, H.;
Gonzalez, J. E.; and Stoica, I. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-Judge
with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36.
Zhuge, M.; Zhao, C.; Ashley, D.; Wang, W.; Khizbullin, D.;
Xiong, Y.; Liu, Z.; Chang, E.; Krishnamoorthi, R.; Tian,
Y.; Shi, Y.; Chandra, V.; and Schmidhuber, J. 2024. Agent-
as-a-Judge: Evaluate Agents with Agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.10934.

Appendix A: Task Descriptions
These cards give enough context to interpret the results; the
builders that assemble each family’s tasks and splits are in
the released code.
MBPP+ validation task · anchor: hidden unit tests
Task. A one-paragraph natural-language programming prob-
lem plus one example call; the solver writes a Python function.
Anchor. The EvalPlus hidden test suite, which adds many
more tests per problem than the original MBPP and repairs
faulty ones, giving reliable pass/fail.
Typical failures. Crashes, mishandled edge cases, printing in-
stead of returning, misread specifications, exactly the failure
classes the op pool checks.
Spider 2.0-Snow validation task · anchor: execution match
Task. An analyst question over a real hosted Snowflake ware-
house: production-scale databases with hundreds of tables,
cryptic columns, sharded table families, and dialect-specific
SQL. The solver writes one query from the question, a ren-
dered schema catalog, and optional domain notes.
Anchor. Execute the candidate and compare the fetched table
to the stored gold result with the official comparator (value-
based; column names and order are ignored).
Typical failures. Unresolvable identifiers, type errors on date-
like columns, and, hardest, queries that run cleanly but com-
pute the wrong thing. Our single-call solver passes about a
third of screened tasks.
Report generation target task · no accurate metric exists
Task. Write one section of an analyst report (e.g., “value-chain
map: control points from ASIC to optical engine”) in mark-
down, given the inputs below.
Inputs. (i) Section title and purpose. (ii) A style contract fixing
units, reference dates, and accounting rules (e.g., “all amounts
USD, calibrated to 2026 Q2, market sizes must not be summed
across pools”). (iii) Evidence cards. (iv) A metric vocabulary
registering the section’s key figures (id, name, value, unit).
Evidence card. An audited unit of evidence: id E0103, one-
sentence claim, verbatim source quote, source attribution and
date, stance (supporting / opposing / neutral), and an auditor’s
credibility verdict.
Requirements. Ground every claim in the cards (cite
[E###]); state each key figure’s value with its inline tag
binding it to the metric vocabulary (rendered downstream as
audit tooltips); hedge weak or disputed evidence and present
both sides of conflicts; include required structure such as a
summary line.
Why no metric exists. Section quality is holistic; even an
expert author cannot reduce “a good section” to a checkable
rule. The RAQS rubric scores lexical and structural proxies of
the requirements above and is treated as reference signal only.
Appendix B: Setup Details
Splits and screening. For MBPP+ and Spider 2.0 we
screen every task with five independent samples of the frozen
single-call solver, graded by the official anchor. We drop tasks
the solver always passes (no room to improve) and stratify
the rest across pass levels for a balanced difficulty mix, then
split 60/40 into train and test. The dev set is ten items, five
clear failures and five clean passes (for report generation:
five golden-quality positives and five class-stratified check-
able failures), so the metric is scored on both classes. In the
released code the dev and test splits are named eval_dev
and eval_locked.
Anchors. MBPP+: hidden unit tests. Spider 2.0: execute
the candidate on the live warehouse and compare the fetched
table to the stored gold result with the official comparator,
which matches values (ignoring column names and order).
We reproduce the evaluator’s CSV round-trip of the fetched
frame, without which even gold queries fail on dtype. Report
generation: the metric loop’s anchor is a frozen demo-delta
soft label, where a teacher compares the frozen-agent report
against the golden section under a closed seven-class miss
taxonomy and passes iff at most one miss class is present.
Each of the 48 held-out sections contributes two locked
items, the frozen-agent report (which the strict anchor al-
most always fails) and the golden section (which passes by
definition), giving 96 items balanced 50/50, so a degenerate
metric scores 0.5. The skill and co-loops are evaluated by the
official rubric evaluator (RAQS, 0–100 normalized), whose
dimensions cover evidence grounding, metric-tag discipline,
claim calibration, structure, and style.
Spider 2.0 prompt grounding. The generation prompt
grounds the solver with a compact typed schema catalog
(columns as name:TYPE, sharded tables collapsed, sample
values on date-like columns) and Snowflake-specific rules
(quoted identifiers, type-respecting casts, value-only grad-
ing). We report this because it is a large, shared effect we
control for, not a contribution: grounding raises the frozen
baseline by half on the screened pool (0.211 to 0.329) but is
applied identically to every arm, so all reported lifts sit on
top of it. It also sets up the detectability contrast: grounding
pushes the solver’s residual failures from compile errors into
clean-executing wrong values.
Appendix C: The Metric Language and
Lifecycle
Language. Recapping the grammar of Eq. 1: a metric is an
expression over ops (pure functions of (task, output) return-
ing drawback/clean/abstain), composed by 
W
, 
V
, nega-
tion, the unweighted K-of-k vote, and a weighted vote against
a threshold, with abstaining children excluded from a com-
binator and an all-abstain node abstaining. Negation and the
weighted vote are offered to the composer on every round
but appear in none of the selected metrics, so every reported
expression reads as a plain drawback disjunction or vote.
Lifecycle. Each task starts from a small pool of seed detec-
tors, the obvious failure checks a practitioner reads straight
off the task description (does the code crash, does the query
group correctly, is a key figure missing); drafting them, or
having an LLM draft them from the task spec, is an after-
noon’s work, and their exact contents barely matter because
the lifecycle grows and prunes the pool from there. Synthesis
authors typed op specs from clustered misses under a closed

per-task taxonomy. The birth gate requires a new op to fire on
at least half its cluster and stay clean on known-good outputs.
Ops born from anchored misses enter active; unlabeled-gap
ops enter shadow and are promoted only on demonstrated an-
chor agreement. Per-op fitness is the leave-one-out marginal
of the incumbent expression, and non-positive ops retire after
a two-round grace.
Selection and guards. The objective multiplies dev agree-
ment by consensus agreement on unlabeled train outputs
(exponent 1.0 for MBPP+ and Spider, 0.25 for report gen-
eration, where op consensus is a weaker regularizer), mi-
nus a small complexity penalty. Both agreement terms are
weighted. Dev agreement is the recall-weighted mean of the
two per-class recalls over the dev items a candidate opines on,
with the fail class at weight 2 and the clean class at weight
1. Train consensus is reliability-weighted: each opining op’s
vote is scaled by 1 + 10 max(0, m
o
) for that op’s anchored
leave-one-out marginal m
o
, so anchor-proven ops lead the
vote and ops with no anchored evidence contribute at unit
weight. This keeps a bloc of cheaply synthesized, correlated
detectors from defining the pseudo-label that the regular-
izer rewards agreeing with. The complexity penalty charges
0.001 per op beyond a floor of three and a further 0.002
per LLM-calling op, which is why selected expressions stay
small and mostly deterministic. Fail-closed anchoring makes
candidates without a usable dev opinion unselectable, and
a validity gate drops all-pass/all-fail/all-abstain candidates.
The naive ablation disables exactly these two guards; the no-
lifecycle ablation disables exactly the birth gate, shadow tier,
and retirement.
Appendix D: Final-Judge Protocol and
Rubrics
Protocol. For each of the 48 held-out sections we pair the
stored round-0 report against the stored peak-round report,
and separately against the final-round report, for every arm
and seed. Pre-repair this is 3 arms × 3 seeds × 2 rounds × 48
sections = 864 pairs; the post-repair rerun adds a fourth seed
on the two co-loop arms, giving 1,056. Each pair is judged
twice with positions swapped, and a win counts only when
both orders agree; otherwise it is a tie.
Rubrics. The generic rubric asks a senior-editor ques-
tion about holistic reader value with no knowledge of the
pipeline’s conventions. The task-aware rubric additionally
states the format contract: evidence citations and inline met-
ric tags are required output that renders downstream; a tag
with no value nearby is a defect; fabricated figures are dis-
qualifying. Both rubrics judge the same stored pairs, so the
four cells of Table 5 differ only in the repair pass (rows) and
the rubric (columns).
Appendix E: What Evolution Actually
Produced
Final artifacts from the paper runs, verbatim except where
marked as condensed, illustrating the central qualitative
claim: everything the loops evolve is legible. Figure 5 gives
the final metric on each task, Figure 6 traces one synthesized
Task Loop Synthesized Bank Evicted Rollback
MBPP+ skill 140–167 50 80–100 1
co 111–154 50 60–101 0
Spider skill 149–177 50 86–114 1–2
co 152–153 50 76–86 1–2
Report skill 6–66 6–50 0–15 0
co 135–156 50 85–106 0
Table 6: Synthesis is prolific and the bounded bank evicts
more than half of what it creates. Skill-loop lifecycle over
100 rounds, bank cap 50, the counterpart to Table 1. Bank: fi-
nal active skills. Evicted: removed by contribution. Rollback:
held-out regressions reverted. Three-seed min–max; a bare
number means all seeds agree. Bold rows are our proposed
configuration.
detector through the whole lifecycle, Figure 7 grades one
attempt with the hidden tests and with the evolved metric
side by side, and Figure 8 pairs skills the two loops learned
independently.
Appendix F: Lifecycle Statistics
Table 1 in the results gives the metric-loop op lifecycle; Ta-
ble 6 here gives the skill-loop side, both for the anchored
arms. The locked metric sets are small, 40 items on MBPP+
and Spider and 96 on reports, but they are regraded in full ev-
ery round: the nine anchored metric-loop runs record 52,600
item-level verdicts against the locked reference and 5,743
birth-gate decisions. Each run stores every verdict with its
per-op trace, which is what makes the paired tests recom-
putable from a finished run without rerunning any loop; the
released code includes the script that reads those tables and
computes the reported counts and p-values. For the skill
loops, synthesis is prolific (roughly 1.5 skills per round), the
bounded bank forces contribution-based eviction of more
than half of everything created, and rollback fires rarely; the
report skill loop is the outlier, its targeted failure capsules
producing skills so effective that a handful suffice (one seed
held its plateau with a bank of six).
Appendix G: Negative and Supporting Results
Naive co-loops are not a free pass. Although naive co-
loops match the anchored arm on held-out evaluation (their
measurement anchor is untouched), their metric arms are
degenerate where inspection matters: on report generation
the naive metric grades 0.97–1.00 of train as passing (versus
0.78–0.82 anchored), and on Spider 2.0 the naive objective
barely moves on two of three seeds.
Skill-loop robustness to metric quality. The weak-metric
Spider 2.0 seeds reported in the results reach the same peak as
their two-op sibling because training signal quality degrades
gracefully: a failed attempt still carries concrete error text
into skill synthesis even when the pass/fail label is noisy.
Anchor size. Ten dev items is a design choice about what
sparse anchoring realistically supplies, not a tuned setting, so
we test how far selection depends on it. The results section

Evolved metrics one final expression per task, verbatim
MBPP+ Spider 2.0 Report
Flag a solution if the judge finds a spec
mismatch, or it crashes on probe inputs,
or it prints instead of returning:
Flag a query if it aggregates without
grouping, or the judge finds it does not
answer the question (selected
independently on two of three seeds):
Flag a section if a registered key figure never
appears, or a weak-credibility card is cited
without hedging (the other two seeds swap
the first leaf for an uncited-claims detector):
(any
spec_mismatch
crash
returns_not_print_only)
(any
missing_group_by
spec_sql_mismatch)
(any
ledger_metric_uncovered
low_status_card_overclaimed)
Figure 5: The final evolved metric on each task, verbatim, with a plain reading above it. Each is a short drawback disjunction
over typed detectors: nothing here is a learned scalar, and each leaf names the failure class it fires on.
A synthesized op born, gated, promoted, and selected (Spider 2.0)
Tracing one op through the whole lifecycle, on the metric-loop seed that ends at (any
syn_forbids_select_star_when_columns spec_sql_mismatch). The loop clustered four unlabeled train outputs that
returned every column although the question implied specific ones, and authored the typed spec {kind: static, check:
forbids_select_star, detects: select_star_specific_columns}. Because its birth evidence was an unlabeled
gap rather than an anchored miss, it entered as a shadow: it ran and recorded verdicts but could not be selected. It was promoted the
same round only once composing it with the incumbent raised dev agreement from 0.71 to 0.81, and selection then adopted it, replacing
the grouping check the seed pool had contributed. The two co-loop seeds on this task converge on a different synthesized op
(syn_top_n_missing_limit) and the third on the seed select_star check, so the leaf is not a fixed artifact of the pool.
Figure 6: One synthesized detector through the whole lifecycle: born from unlabeled outputs, admitted as a shadow,
promoted only once it raised anchor agreement, then selected. A Spider 2.0 metric-loop seed; the aggregate counts are
Table 1.
reports the numbers; the protocol behind them is an offline
replay of report-generation selection, drawing 200 stratified
subsamples per anchor size from the same ten items, preserv-
ing the fail/clean balance within each draw, and rescoring
every candidate expression the live run actually considered
under the reduced anchor. No new generation and no new
solver calls are involved, so the comparison isolates the an-
chor’s contribution to selection from run-to-run variance.
Appendix H: Reproducibility
The code is released at https://github.com/amazon-science/
Self-Evolving-Agents-Double-Ratchet: all loops, op packs,
split builders, screening scripts, and the judge protocols, suf-
ficient to rerun every experiment end to end and reproduce
results in line with those reported here. We release code only,
not run data, results, or logs. All model calls go through the
Amazon Bedrock API, so wall-clock time is dominated by
API latency. Each run writes its own round-by-round his-
tory, op pool, skill bank, and judge outputs as structured
result files, and every number in this paper is read directly
from those files. The role-to-model table named in the setup
covers every LLM role: solver, teacher, composer, skill syn-
thesizer, judge ops, and final judge. Spider 2.0 requires cre-
dentialed access to the benchmark’s hosted warehouse; all
other experiments are self-contained.

Grading one task: hidden tests vs. evolved metric MBPP+ task, final-round trace, verbatim
Task and solver output Ground-truth anchor Evolved metric
“Write a function to find the ratio of zeroes in an
array of integers.”
def zero_count(nums):
zeros = sum(1 for x
in nums if x == 0)
non_zeros = len(nums) - zeros
...
return zeros / non_zeros
The code runs cleanly and returns a number; it
computes the ratio to non-zeros where the spec
wants the ratio to all elements. Only the
meaning is wrong.
Hidden unit tests (EvalPlus).
assert zero_count(...)
→ AssertionError
Verdict: fail.
The verdict is reliable but opaque:
no indication of which requirement
was misread.
Evolved composition (any
spec_mismatch crash
returns_not_print_only).
crash: clean
returns_not_print_only: clean
spec_mismatch (judge op):
drawback
Verdict: fail, agreeing with the anchor,
and naming the failure class: the
specification was misread.
The named drawback is what turns this attempt into a usable failure capsule for skill synthesis; the anchor’s bare verdict could not have
driven the same repair.
Figure 7: The same verdict, reached two ways: the hidden tests say fail, and the evolved metric says fail while naming
why. One MBPP+ attempt whose code runs cleanly and returns a number but computes the wrong quantity. Only the middle
column is ground truth; the right column is what an inspectable composition adds on top of an equally correct verdict.
Same lesson, two loops functionally matched skills, reference vs. co-evolved, condensed
Each pair below was synthesized independently, one by the reference loop under ground-truth grading and one under the evolved metric
(Double Ratchet); neither loop saw the other. Converging on the same task lesson is the qualitative face of the retention result.
MBPP+ Spider 2.0 Report
(grader imports a literal identifier) (empty result diagnosis) (the anti-erasure lesson)
reference function-name-
from-assert: “the harness imports
the symbol literally as written in the
assert; lift the identifier verbatim
including case, the prose is only a hint.”
reference sql-empty-result-
diagnosis: “a 0-row result is almost
never correct when the gold has rows;
incrementally relax predicates to locate
which condition eliminates all rows.”
reference metric-tag-annotates-
not-replaces: “the scorer counts a
figure only when a literal number sits
adjacent to the brace tag; a tag with no
rendered numeral reads as an unrendered
placeholder.”
co copy_callable_
identifier_from_assert: “the
grader imports the name verbatim from
the assert; reproduce that exact spelling
letter for letter, including apparent typos.”
co sql-empty-result-
sanity-probe: “an empty result
almost always means one predicate
matched nothing; validate each CTE’s
row count in isolation before trusting the
join.”
co metric-tag-inline-
after-number: “the tag annotates the
value; it never replaces the value, and a
bare card cite does not satisfy it.”
Figure 8: Trained on ground truth and trained on the evolved metric, the two loops independently learn the same task
lesson. One functionally matched skill pair per task, condensed. Neither loop saw the other, so the convergence is the qualitative
face of the lift-retention result in Table 3.
