
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2607.27250

Do Context Files Help Coding Agents?
A Two-Agent Ablation Study on Real Repositories
Prakhar Khatri
Independent Researcher
prakharkhatri123@gmail.com
Abstract
Persistent context files (AGENTS.md,
CLAUDE.md) are standard practice for guid-
ing AI coding agents, yet evidence for their
effectiveness is contradictory. We present
a controlled ablation of context-injection
strategy across two frontier agents (Claude
Code and Codex), 17 real tasks from 3
repositories (15 shared + 2 Codex-only), and
288 evaluated runs with gold-test evalua-
tion. Context strategy does not measurably
move correctness on either agent (bounded
to ≤10–15pp via equivalence testing). A
failure-mode triage reveals why: agents fail
on implementation skill—feature design,
pattern selection, exact wiring—not missing
repository knowledge that a context file could
supply; a manipulation probe confirms the
real AGENTS.md never converts a near-miss
to a pass on either agent. We further show
that borderline task difficulty is agent-specific
(Spearman ρ=0.75), offering a candidate
explanation for prior contradictions: single-
agent studies draw tasks from different agents’
informative bands. We release all code, data,
and analysis.
1 Introduction
Repository context files—AGENTS.md,
CLAUDE.md, and similar project-level guides—
have become ubiquitous infrastructure for AI
coding agents. Platforms like Claude Code auto-
load these files into every session; practitioners
invest significant effort authoring coding con-
ventions, architectural constraints, and workflow
guidance, expecting agents to produce better code
as a result.
Yet empirical evidence is contradictory. Lulla
et al. (2026) report that AGENTS.md files im-
prove agent efficiency (lower wall-clock runtime
and fewer output tokens), while Gloaguen et al.
(2026) find no significant effect on task comple-
tion when context files are present versus absent.
The two studies differ in agent (Codex-family vs.
Claude-family), evaluation method, and experi-
mental control—making reconciliation impossible
without a study that varies injection strategy under
controlled conditions across both agent families.
This paper presents such a study. We conduct
a controlled ablation of context-injection strategy
on real merged pull requests, evaluated with hid-
den gold tests (SWE-bench Tier-C style), across
two frontier agents from different providers. Our
three strategies—NONE (no context), ALWAYS ON
(full AGENTS.md in every system prompt), and
SELECTIVE (topic-organized wiki files the agent
retrieves on demand)—vary primarily how context
is delivered (see §3.3 for a caveat on the SELEC-
TIVE corpus).
Our contributions are:
1. A controlled, two-agent ablation (288 eval-
uated runs: 15 Claude tasks + 17 Codex
tasks, each × 3 strategies × 3 repeats) with
SWE-bench-style gold-test evaluation on real
repositories, yielding a bounded null: the
correctness effect is ≤10pp (Claude) / ≤15pp
(Codex).
2. A failure-mode triage and manipulation
probe demonstrating that real tasks fail on
implementation skill, not missing reposi-
tory knowledge—the mechanism behind the
null—and that the real AGENTS.md cannot
convert a near-miss failure to a pass on either
agent.
3. Evidence that borderline task difficulty is
agent-specific: the same task may be trivially
solvable for one agent yet challenging for
another, explaining why single-agent studies
reach contradictory conclusions.
arXiv:2607.27250v1 [cs.SE] 28 Jul 2026

2 Related Work
Coding agents and benchmarks. SWE-
bench (Jimenez et al., 2024) established the
issue-to-PR evaluation paradigm for coding
agents, and subsequent work on agent–computer
interfaces (Yang et al., 2024) shows that harness
design (tool ordering, context budgets, retry
logic) materially affects performance independent
of the underlying model. Our work builds on
this paradigm but studies a different variable:
persistent repository context rather than harness
mechanics.
Context and memory for agents. Persis-
tent memory systems for LLM agents range
from operating-system-style memory manage-
ment (Packer et al., 2023) to session-accumulated
skill libraries (Wang et al., 2023), and agent
loops that interleave reasoning, acting, and self-
reflection (Yao et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023). A
separate line of work shows that how long con-
texts are arranged matters: models use informa-
tion unevenly across a long prompt, often un-
derusing material placed mid-context (Liu et al.,
2024a)—directly relevant to whether an always-
on AGENTS.md in the system prompt is actu-
ally attended to. AGENTS.md files represent the
simplest form: a static document loaded at ses-
sion start. Lulla et al. (2026) study the impact
of these files on Codex-family agents, measuring
wall-clock time and token usage; they report effi-
ciency improvements but do not control for injec-
tion strategy. Gloaguen et al. (2026) run a larger
naturalistic study with Claude-family agents and
find no significant effect on correctness. Neither
study isolates injection strategy as an independent
variable, nor do they test across agent families.
Repository-level context for code gen-
eration. Retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020) has been applied
to code tasks by retrieving relevant files, func-
tions, or documentation before generation,
and repository-level benchmarks and retrieval
methods—REPOCODER (Zhang et al., 2023),
CROSSCODEEVAL (Ding et al., 2023), and RE-
POBENCH (Liu et al., 2024b)—specifically target
cross-file and repository-scale context. Recent
work on SWE-bench Verified (OpenAI, 2024)
refines the benchmark with human-validated in-
stances, raising the evaluation bar. However, these
efforts focus on what context to retrieve from the
File in In system Retrievable
Strategy workspace prompt wiki files
NONE — — —
ALWAYS ON — full AGENTS.md —
SELECTIVE — retrieval hint wiki/*.md
Figure 1: The three context-injection strategies. In ev-
ery condition the workspace AGENTS.md is removed,
so the injection channel is the only context the agent
receives. NONE provides no context; ALWAYS ON in-
jects the full file each turn; SELECTIVE places topic-
organized wiki files in the workspace that the agent
reads on demand, cued by a system-prompt hint. The
SELECTIVE corpus equals the AGENTS.md for one
repository (opshin) but is a broader auto-generated wiki
for the others (§3.3).
codebase at query time, whereas AGENTS.md
files represent a static, author-curated context
layer orthogonal to retrieval—our study isolates
whether this layer helps, and how.
Equivalence testing in empirical SE. Tradi-
tional null-hypothesis testing cannot confirm the
absence of an effect (Schuirmann, 1987). Two
one-sided tests (TOST) provide bounded equiva-
lence claims, but remain rare in agent evaluation.
We adopt TOST alongside permutation tests and
power analysis to characterize our null, following
recommendations from empirical software engi-
neering methodology (Wohlin et al., 2012).
3 Method
3.1 Overview
We measure whether the strategy by which repos-
itory context is injected into a coding agent affects
task correctness or efficiency. The independent
variable has three levels (NONE, ALWAYS ON
, SE-
LECTIVE); the dependent variables are binary cor-
rectness (gold tests pass/fail) and continuous ef-
ficiency metrics (tool calls, wall-clock time, out-
put tokens, cache usage). Each task is run under
all three strategies with 3 independent repeats, on
two agents, yielding a within-task paired design.
In total the design comprises 291 completed agent
runs; 3 Claude runs failed to produce a valid gold-
test evaluation (crash/timeout) and are excluded
from correctness, leaving 288 evaluated cells (ef-
ficiency metrics use all completed runs, so their
per-cell n varies slightly). Figure 1 illustrates the
three injection strategies.

3.2 Task Selection and Evaluation
Repositories. We surveyed ∼40 repositories
drawn from three sources: our own manual scan,
and the repository sets of Lulla et al. (2026) and
Gloaguen et al. (2026). We excluded SWE-bench
repositories (none maintain AGENTS.md files)
and filtered candidates on four criteria: (1) exactly
one root AGENTS.md with no competing instruc-
tion stack; (2) file quality rated Good or Excellent
on a structured rubric (coverage of build/test/style
conventions, architectural guidance, specificity);
(3) feasible pilot setup (no oversized monorepos);
(4) Python-only, to avoid confounding context ef-
fects with build-system or language differences.
Six repositories survived; we narrowed to three for
budget feasibility: pdm (package manager, 477-
word context file), firebase-admin-python (cloud
SDK, 1236-word file rated “Excellent”), and op-
shin (domain-specific compiler, 248-word file).
These span distinct domains (tooling, cloud infras-
tructure, compilers) and AGENTS.md quality lev-
els (248–1236 words).
Tasks. We mine tasks from merged pull requests
via the GitHub API: the PR description becomes
the agent prompt, the base commit the starting
state, and the PR’s own test files the gold evalua-
tion. We keep PRs that (1) add or modify test files
(required for gold-test scoring; without tests one
falls back to fuzzy diff-overlap, which inflates ap-
parent variance), (2) are non-trivial (multiple files
or >50 LOC), and (3) need no external credentials
or services (for the egress-locked pod). This yields
an initial batch of 12 tasks (4 per repository, span-
ning medium and complex difficulty). To avoid a
floor/ceiling design—where every task is too easy
or too hard for any manipulation to register—we
ran a Codex screening sweep over 84 candidate
tasks (3 strategies × 1 repeat) to locate the border-
line band (0<pass<1), adding 4 borderline tasks.
Screening also surfaced a portability bug in our ef-
fort classifier (§4.4). The final set is 17 tasks for
Codex and 15 for Claude; two high-effort tasks are
Codex-only, dropped from the Claude arm under
an Anthropic budget cap. Because the borderline
band was calibrated on Codex, the screened tasks
need not be borderline for Claude—an instance of
the agent-specific difficulty we analyze in §4.3.
Evaluation (Tier-C). After the agent completes,
we extract test files from the gold PR diff, apply
them onto the agent’s workspace, and run them
against the agent’s code. The task passes if and
only if all gold tests pass. This follows the SWE-
bench evaluation protocol: the agent never sees the
test files; they serve as an oracle.
Safety and isolation. All runs execute on an
egress-locked pod with GitHub DNS blackholed.
Git remotes are scrubbed, credentials are stripped,
and git push/commit commands are denied via
PATH shims. Future commit history is pruned
so the agent cannot read gold solutions from git
log.
3.3 Independent Variable: Injection Strategy
NONE: The AGENTS.md file is removed from
the workspace. No repository context is pro-
vided in the system prompt or accessible to
the agent. The agent works from the code-
base alone.
ALWAYS ON
: The full AGENTS.md content is
injected into the system prompt every turn,
preceded by a framing sentence (“The fol-
lowing is the repository’s AGENTS.md
guide...”). The file is removed from the
workspace to prevent double-reading.
SELECTIVE: Topic-organized wiki files
(e.g., wiki/architecture.md,
wiki/error-handling.md) are placed
in the workspace, and a system-prompt hint
tells the agent to consult wiki/*.md; the
agent retrieves relevant files on demand via
its Read tool. Caveat on the SELECTIVE
corpus. The wiki is content-matched to
the AGENTS.md for only one repository
(opshin: a single overview.md equal to
the 256-word file). For pdm and firebase the
wiki is a broader, auto-generated repository
wiki—roughly 10× and 18× the words
of the AGENTS.md, respectively—so for
those repositories SELECTIVE varies both
the delivery channel and the context corpus.
We treat this as a known confound: it means
SELECTIVE is best read as “on-demand
retrieval from a repository wiki” rather than
a pure re-packaging of the AGENTS.md.
Notably, the larger corpus only strengthens
the correctness null—it gave the agent
strictly more material and still did not raise
pass-rates (§4.1).
In all conditions, the AGENTS.md file itself is
removed from the workspace, so each strategy de-

livers only what it explicitly provides. The within-
strategy contrasts are clean; the corpus caveat
above qualifies the SELECTIVE arm and is revis-
ited in the Limitations.
3.4 Agents
We run two frontier coding agents from different
providers:
• Claude Code (claude-sonnet-4-6,
Anthropic). Multi-turn, tool-use agent
invoked via claude --print
--bare --output-format
stream-json. Context injected via
--append-system-prompt. Cost-
capped at $6/run.
• Codex CLI (gpt-5.5, OpenAI, ChatGPT-
plan auth). Single-session agent invoked via
codex exec --json. Context injected
by prepending to the user prompt (Codex
lacks a system-prompt flag). Turn-capped at
120 via watchdog.
Both agents use the same workspace, task
prompt, and evaluation pipeline. The injection-
channel asymmetry (system prompt vs. user-turn
prepend) is a noted confound (see Limitations).
3.5 Efficiency Metrics
We distinguish portable metrics (comparable
across agents) from agent-specific metrics:
• Portable: tool calls, wall-clock duration,
output tokens.
• Agent-specific: cache-read tokens, cache-
creation tokens (Claude only; Codex folds
cached input into input tokens
 with no
separate accounting).
Turns are excluded as a cross-agent metric:
Codex emits exactly 1 turn.completed event
per session regardless of work performed (a classi-
fier artifact we discovered during screening; §4.4).
3.6 Statistical Analysis
The unit of analysis is the task (not the repeat).
For each (task, strategy) pair, the 3 repeats are av-
eraged to yield one value per task per strategy. We
then apply:
• Omnibus permutation test: strategy labels
permuted within-task (10,000–20,000 itera-
tions); test statistic = variance of marginal
strategy pass-rates.
Table 1: Pass-rate by strategy and agent. Omnibus per-
mutation p-values test whether strategy explains cor-
rectness beyond task difficulty.
Strategy Claude (15 tasks) Codex (17 tasks)
NONE 53.3% (24/45) 58.8% (30/51)
ALWAYS ON 55.6% (25/45) 56.9% (29/51)
SELECTIVE 55.6% (25/45) 52.9% (27/51)
Omnibus p 1.000 0.66
• Paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests with
Holm-Bonferroni correction for efficiency
metrics (family of 12 tests across 3 pairs ×
4 metrics).
• TOST equivalence: task-clustered bootstrap
(10k) on paired strategy differences; equiva-
lence declared if 95% CI falls within ±δ.
• Monte Carlo power: simulate binary out-
comes under varying true ∆ and n
tasks 
to de-
termine minimum detectable effect (MDE)
and sample size for 80% power.
4 Results
4.1 Correctness: No Strategy Effect (Both
Agents)
Table 1 presents pass-rates by strategy and agent.
Neither agent shows a statistically significant strat-
egy effect.
For Claude, all pairwise strategy differences
are ≤2.3pp. For Codex, the largest difference is
5.9pp (NONE vs. SELECTIVE), driven by per-task
noise at n=3 repeats. The omnibus permutation
test shows no detectable strategy effect (p=1.00
Claude; p=0.66 Codex). We note this test is in-
trinsically low-power here: the floor/ceiling struc-
ture (§4.3) leaves little marginal-pass-rate variance
to permute, so the p=1.00 is close to mechanical
and the substantive null is carried by the dynamic-
range (borderline) subset analyzed below, not by
the omnibus alone.
Figure 2 makes the null visible at the task level:
for almost every task the three strategy markers
coincide at a pass-rate of 0 or 1 (the floor/ceiling
structure of §4.3), and the few tasks where the
markers separate are precisely the agent-specific
borderline tasks—different tasks for each agent.
The null holds with dynamic range. A poten-
tial objection is that the null reflects floor/ceiling
effects (tasks too easy or too hard for context to

0 1/3 2/3 1
pass-rate (3 repeats)
firebase#920
firebase#926
opshin#598
opshin#605
opshin#610
pdm#3797
pdm#3790
firebase#906
opshin#595
firebase#932
firebase#939
firebase#940
opshin#616
pdm#3769
pdm#3781
Claude Code (sonnet-4-6)
0 1/3 2/3 1
pass-rate (3 repeats)
firebase#920
opshin#605
opshin#610
pdm#3790
pdm#3797
firebase#932
opshin#598
firebase#906
firebase#926
pdm#3769
firebase#939
firebase#940
opshin#595
opshin#609
opshin#614
opshin#616
pdm#3781
Codex (gpt-5.5)
none always_on selective
Figure 2: Per-task pass-rate (3 repeats) by injection strategy, one panel per agent, tasks ordered by mean pass-rate.
For the large majority of tasks the NONE/ALWAYS ON/SELECTIVE markers coincide—strategy does not move
correctness—and tasks sit at the floor (0) or ceiling (1). The markers separate only on the handful of borderline
tasks, which differ by agent (e.g. pdm#3790 for Claude; pdm#3769, firebase#926 for Codex), illustrating the agent-
specific difficulty of §4.3.
matter). We address this with borderline-task ex-
pansion: on 4 Codex-borderline tasks (17–67%
baseline pass rate), NONE achieves 58% vs. AL-
WAYS ON
 42% and SELECTIVE 42%—context in-
jection does not help even where the design has
power to detect an effect.
Equivalence bounds. Descriptive equivalence
testing (TOST on the task-clustered bootstrap)
bounds every pairwise strategy difference to
<10pp for Claude and <15pp for Codex—
compatible with the >30pp MDE (§4.5) because
the observed point estimates are ≈0, not a pow-
ered equivalence claim given n=15–17 clusters.
4.2 Efficiency: Two Narrow Process Signals,
Otherwise Null
Claude. SELECTIVE uses significantly less
cache-creation tokens than NONE (unanimous
11/11 tasks lower; p=0.001, p
Holm
=0.012).
Directional but non-significant trends appear
for cache-read (9/11 lower, p=0.067) and AL-
WAYS ON
 vs. SELECTIVE duration (8/11 lower,
p=0.054). No significant effect on turns or tool
calls after correction. We read this cache result
mechanically rather than as a strategy benefit:
SELECTIVE keeps only a short retrieval hint
in the system prompt and reads a few files on
demand, whereas ALWAYS ON
 re-presents the
whole AGENTS.md each turn—so the footprint
difference follows from the delivery mechanics
(and, for pdm/firebase, from a different wiki
corpus; §3.3), not from context making the agent
more capable.
Codex. All efficiency metrics are flat across
strategies: tool calls 32/32/32, output tokens
±3.8%, duration ±3.8% (all |d
z 
|<0.2, negligible
effect size).
A within-agent process effect
(Claude × opshin). A second, narrow effi-
ciency signal survives. On opshin—the one
repository whose AGENTS.md carries explicit
runtime/compile-time warnings (“the full test suite
takes >20 minutes”)—Claude’s within-task wall-
clock time is ∼24% lower under context (NONE
2689s vs. ALWAYS ON 2066s vs. SELECTIVE
2032s; faster-with-context on 4/5 tasks, sign-flip
p=0.125, underpowered at n=5). What lifts this

Table 2: Claude on opshin: context reduces blind full-
suite test runs and wall-clock time. Full-suite count =
pytest invocations targeting the whole suite per cell.
Strategy Full-suite runs/cell Duration (s)
NONE 3.67 2689
ALWAYS ON 2.44 2066
SELECTIVE 1.67 2032
above noise is a dose-dependent mechanism:
counting the agent’s pytest invocations, the
number of blind full-suite runs per cell falls mono-
tonically NONE 3.67 → ALWAYS ON
 2.44 →
SELECTIVE 1.67 (Table 2), directional under
a within-task paired test (fewer on 3/4 tasks,
p=0.25, n=4; per-task counts in Appendix B).
Stripped of the AGENTS.md warning, the agent
repeatedly runs the slow full suite; given the
warning, it runs targeted tests instead. The dose
ordering (SELECTIVE < ALWAYS ON
 < NONE)
matches both the full-suite count and the du-
ration. The scope is deliberately narrow: the
effect appears only for Claude (Codex duration
is flat) and only on opshin (firebase shows the
opposite +82s direction—a fast repository with
little to warn about). Like the cache signal, it is
a process effect (how the agent works), not an
outcome effect (correctness, still null). We report
it as exploratory: it emerged from a post-hoc
mechanism analysis rather than the pre-registered
efficiency-metric family, and we therefore do not
fold it into the Holm-corrected confirmatory tests
below.
Cross-agent comparison (portable metrics,
qualitative). Codex is consistently leaner (fewer
tool calls, less wall-clock time, fewer output
tokens) at a slightly lower pass-rate. We re-
port this only qualitatively: the agents differ
in injection channel (§3.3), tokenizer, and to-
ken accounting (Codex folds cached input into
input tokens
), so any between-agent gap is
confounded. Our actual contrast—the within-
agent strategy comparison—is unaffected.
4.3 Agent-Specific Borderline Tasks
A striking cross-agent finding: the same task oc-
cupies different difficulty bands depending on the
agent.
This is not merely anecdotal. Across the 15
tasks both agents attempted, per-task pass rates
are positively but imperfectly correlated (Spear-
Table 3: Agent-specific difficulty. Pass counts
none/always/selective; bold marks the borderline out-
come. pdm#3790 is borderline for Claude only;
pdm#3769 for Codex only.
Task Claude Codex
pdm#3790 1/3 · 2/3 · 1/3 0/3 · 0/3 · 0/3
pdm#3769 3/3 · 3/3 · 3/3 2/3 · 3/3 · 1/3
man ρ=0.75, p=0.001; Pearson r=0.77): diffi-
culty largely transfers, yet the informative band
does not. Of the 15 shared tasks, 6 are borderline
(0<pass<1) for exactly one agent, and 6 differ in
floor/ceiling status across agents—so for roughly
40% of tasks, the agent that would reveal a context
effect is not the same agent.
This offers a candidate explanation for prior
contradictions—a hypothesis we cannot test di-
rectly without their exact task sets: if Paper
1 (Codex-family) and Paper 2 (Claude-family)
drew tasks that landed in different agents’ bor-
derline bands, they would observe different con-
text effects—not because context inherently helps
or doesn’t, but because the informative range is
agent-specific. A practical consequence is that ab-
lation studies must screen tasks per agent; a bor-
derline set calibrated on one agent gives another
agent mostly floor/ceiling tasks, where no manip-
ulation can show an effect.
4.4 Classifier Portability Lesson
During borderline screening, our effort classi-
fier (split on turns≥30) silently misclassified all
Codex tasks as “trivial” because Codex emits
exactly 1 turn.completed event per ses-
sion. Eight genuinely high-effort tasks (18–51
tool calls, 410–1220s) were incorrectly dropped.
Reclassifying on tool calls—the pre-registered
portable metric—recovered them. This demon-
strates that turn-based metrics are non-portable
across agent architectures.
4.5 Power Analysis and Detection Limits
Our Monte Carlo simulation (§3.6) reveals:
• MDE at n=17, reps=3: even a large
∆=30pp effect is caught only 57% of the
time; smaller effects fare worse.
• Detecting ∆=10pp at 80% power requires
∼120–200 tasks.
• Adding repeats barely helps (n=17, reps

3→10: power increases 13%→58% for
∆=15pp).
Task-level variance dominates: scaling requires
more tasks, not more repeats. This is a method-
ological finding relevant to future ablation study
designs.
5 Discussion
5.1 Why the Null Holds: Skill, Not
Knowledge
The failure-mode triage (§5.1) reveals why context
files do not help. We inspected the near-miss fail-
ures (1–4 failing gold tests)—the tasks most likely
to flip with one additional piece of information:
• Task 510 (opshin): requires a subtle union-
expansion optimization. The agent built the
entire optimization pass but introduced a cor-
rectness bug. Gap: engineering precision, not
a missing fact.
• Task 907 (firebase): requires proactive auth-
token refresh. The agent implemented reac-
tive retry instead. Gap: architectural pattern
choice, not secret knowledge.
• Task 554 (opshin): requires rejecting V2
validator arguments. The agent knew the V3
rule (from the code) but miswired the check.
Gap: exact behavioral specification.
• Task 593 (opshin): requires type-narrowing
through isinstance + assert. Gap:
deep type-system reasoning.
None of these failures isolate a knowable-fact
gap that an AGENTS.md could fill. They fail on
implementation skill—feature design, pattern se-
lection, exact wiring—not on missing repository-
private knowledge.
5.2 Manipulation-Validity Probe
The triage motivates an obvious objection: per-
haps the null reflects an inert manipulation—we
injected text that did nothing measurable. We
address this directly with a pre-registered probe.
First, we rated our three context files against a
structured quality rubric we applied across a 40-
repository AGENTS.md corpus (scoring coverage
of build/test/style conventions, architectural guid-
ance, and specificity); on this rubric firebase rates
“Excellent,” pdm and opshin “Good”—they are
Table 4: Manipulation-validity probe: pass-rate
(none/always/selective) on the two convention-closest
near-miss tasks. The real AGENTS.md never converts
a failure to a pass on either agent; in the single task with
cross-agent range (Claude, 907), more context does not
improve correctness.
Task Codex Claude
907 (firebase) 0/3 · 0/3 · 0/3 2/3 · 1/3 · 0/3
554 (opshin) 0/3 · 0/3 · 0/3 0/3 · 0/3 · 0/3
not low-quality files. This is our own rubric as-
sessment, not a third-party audit. Second, we re-
ran the two convention-closest near-misses (op-
shin 554, firebase 907) under all three strategies, 3
repeats, on both agents (36 cells), to test whether
the real, unmodified AGENTS.md can flip a near-
miss to a pass (Table 4).
The result confirms the pre-registration and
sharpens it. (1) No helpful flip anywhere: the real
AGENTS.md never rescues a near-miss (Codex
fails 18/18 regardless of strategy; task 907’s NONE
near-miss of 109 pass / 1 fail never crosses). (2) In
the one task with cross-agent range, more context
did not help: task 907 is Codex-hard but Claude-
borderline, and Claude passes it 2/3 under NONE,
1/3 under ALWAYS ON
, 0/3 under SELECTIVE. We
do not claim a general downward effect—this is a
single task at n=3 repeats—but the trend is clearly
non-positive, and no condition on either agent pro-
duced a flip toward passing. (3) Task 554 is
Claude-floored, another instance of agent-specific
difficulty (§4.3). The probe is a stronger answer
to “did your manipulation do anything?” than a
bare null: across both agents the real AGENTS.md
never converts a near-miss to a pass. The manipu-
lation is not inert (it can perturb behavior, and our
files rate Good/Excellent on our quality rubric); it
simply does not supply the implementation skill
that gates these tasks.
5.3 Reconciling Prior Work
Our results suggest a reconciliation of the Paper
1 / Paper 2 contradiction (offered as a hypothe-
sis, since we do not have access to their exact task
sets):
1. Context files do not improve correctness on
either agent family (confirming Paper 2).
2. The efficiency gain Paper 1 reports likely re-
flects the mechanical cost of context injec-
tion (larger prompts → more tokens), not a

task-performance improvement. Notably, Pa-
per 2 reports the opposite sign on its own
cost metric—context files increase inference
cost by over 20%—consistent with injec-
tion mechanics, not agent capability, driv-
ing these numbers in either direction de-
pending on setup. Our SELECTIVE strat-
egy achieves a real cache-efficiency reduc-
tion (p
Holm
=0.012), but this is likewise an ar-
tifact of injection mechanics, not agent capa-
bility.
3. Prior disagreements may reflect agent-
specific borderline effects (§4.3): a task in
one agent’s informative band appears in an-
other’s floor/ceiling.
5.4 Practitioner Implications
The AGENTS.md files in our sample are real-
world context files representative of practitioner
effort—style guides, architectural notes, error-
handling conventions. Scoped to our setting—3
Python repositories, naturalistic style-guide-type
context, and the injection channel rather than
content—we detect no correctness benefit: in this
sample, generic context files do not measurably
improve coding-agent correctness (bounded to
<10–15pp; see Limitations). We cannot rule out
benefits for other languages, larger repositories, or
purpose-built task-specific context; the safe read-
ing is that effort spent on generic context docu-
ments may pay off less than effort on task de-
composition, tooling, or example-driven prompt-
ing. One nuance is genuinely actionable, however:
even when context does not change pass/fail, it
can change how the agent works—our SELECTIVE
strategy measurably reduces wasted full-suite test
runs (Table 2)—so context may still earn its place
on cost and latency grounds.
6 Conclusion
We presented a controlled ablation of context-
injection strategy for coding agents, spanning 291
agent runs (288 evaluated) across two frontier
agents and 17 real-world tasks, plus a 36-cell
manipulation-validity probe. Context-injection
strategy does not measurably move correctness
(observed effects bounded to <10–15pp via de-
scriptive TOST equivalence; not a powered equiv-
alence claim, §4.5). The two surviving efficiency
effects are both narrow and process-level: a cache-
footprint reduction for Claude’s SELECTIVE strat-
egy, and a dose-dependent reduction in blind full-
suite test runs on the one repository whose con-
text file warns about test cost—neither changes the
correctness outcome.
Our failure-mode analysis and probe reveal the
mechanism: real coding tasks fail on implementa-
tion skill, not missing repository knowledge that a
context file could supply; across both agents the
real context file never converts a near-miss to a
pass (and in the single Claude task with cross-
agent dynamic range, at n=3 repeats, the trend
was non-positive—a single-task observation, not
a general downward effect). The “borderline is
agent-specific” finding explains prior contradic-
tions and implies that future ablation studies must
screen tasks per-agent to achieve informative dy-
namic range.
We release our full experimental harness, 291-
run dataset (288 evaluated cells), and power anal-
ysis code to support future work on scaling this
design to the ∼120-task threshold needed for pow-
ered equivalence at 10pp.
Limitations
1. Sample size. 15/17 tasks with 3 repeats.
MDE >30pp; a 10pp effect is undetectable.
Our TOST bounds the effect to <10–15pp
but cannot achieve narrower equivalence
without ∼120 tasks.
2. Repository diversity. Three Python repos-
itories. Results may not generalize to other
languages, larger codebases, or repositories
with exceptionally detailed context files.
3. Injection-channel asymmetry. Claude re-
ceives context via system prompt; Codex via
user-turn prepend (no system-prompt flag).
This is a confound between the agent arms,
though the within-agent strategy comparison
remains clean.
4. Ecological validity. Our ALWAYS ON
 con-
dition injects context via system prompt ev-
ery turn, which is stronger than the natu-
ral workflow (agent reads the file once from
the workspace). We argue that if guaran-
teed presence does not help, natural discov-
ery cannot either—but this is an inference,
not a direct measurement. A fourth “natural”
condition where the file simply exists in the
workspace would strengthen ecological va-
lidity.

5. Selective is our construction, and its cor-
pus is not content-matched. The wiki-split
design and retrieval hint are specific choices;
alternative selective strategies (e.g., semantic
retrieval) might yield different results. More
importantly, the SELECTIVE wiki equals the
AGENTS.md only for opshin; for pdm and
firebase it is a broader auto-generated reposi-
tory wiki (∼10×/18× larger), so SELECTIVE
confounds delivery channel with context cor-
pus for two of three repositories (§3.3). This
does not threaten the correctness null (the
larger corpus, if anything, gave SELECTIVE
an advantage it did not convert into passes),
but it does mean we cannot cleanly attribute
the SELECTIVE cache-footprint reduction to
channel alone, and a content-matched split
is required before interpreting SELECTIVE
as a pure channel manipulation. We leave
an equal-content SELECTIVE arm across all
repositories to future work.
6. Inert-manipulation concern. Our context
files are naturalistic (not purpose-built for
specific tasks). The manipulation-validity
probe (§5.2) shows the real AGENTS.md can
perturb behavior but never converts a near-
miss to a pass, and our own rubric assess-
ment rates the files Good/Excellent—so the
null is not an artifact of low-quality or inert
context. Whether purpose-built, task-specific
context (a fact the agent provably cannot in-
fer) would help remains an open question for
future work.
7. Model-version snapshot. All results are
specific to claude-sonnet-4-6 and
gpt-5.5 as of this study; agent behavior,
and hence the null, may shift as these models
are updated.
8. Mixed provenance. Claude repeat-0 ran on a
local machine; repeats 1–2 on the pod. A sen-
sitivity analysis that drops repeat-0 entirely
and re-estimates the contrasts from the pod-
only repeats leaves the correctness null intact:
Claude’s marginal pass-rates remain 53–55%
under all three strategies, and every paired
strategy contrast stays within ±3.3pp (largest
shift: SELECTIVE − NONE moves from +2.2
to 0.0pp). Behavior is also stable on matched
cross-check cells (e.g. 22 vs. 23 turns). The
provenance split therefore does not drive the
result.
Ethics Statement
This study involves no human subjects or personal
data. The experimental subjects are AI coding
agents operating on public open-source reposito-
ries. All agent runs execute in an egress-locked
sandbox that prevents any modification of exter-
nal state (no pushes, commits, or pull requests
reach GitHub); see Appendix A. AI coding agents
(Claude Code, Codex) are the object of study, not
authoring tools. Separately, the authors used an AI
assistant for drafting support and code scaffolding;
all experimental results, statistics, and claims were
verified by the authors against the released data.
References
Yangruibo Ding, Zijian Wang, Wasi Uddin Ahmad,
Hantian Ding, Ming Tan, Nihal Jain, Murali Kr-
ishna Ramanathan, Ramesh Nallapati, Parminder
Bhatia, Dan Roth, and Bing Xiang. 2023. Cross-
CodeEval: A diverse and multilingual benchmark
for cross-file code completion. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
ArXiv:2310.11248.
Thibaud Gloaguen, Niels M¨undler, Mark M¨uller,
Veselin Raychev, and Martin Vechev. 2026. Eval-
uating AGENTS.md: Are repository-level con-
text files helpful for coding agents? Preprint,
arXiv:2602.11988. ArXiv:2602.11988.
Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig,
Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
Narasimhan. 2024. SWE-bench: Can language
models resolve real-world GitHub issues? In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR). ArXiv:2310.06770.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus,
Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
Heinrich K¨uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih,
Tim Rockt¨aschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for
knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
ArXiv:2005.11401.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-
jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy
Liang. 2024a. Lost in the middle: How language
models use long contexts. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL).
ArXiv:2307.03172.
Tianyang Liu, Canwen Xu, and Julian McAuley.
2024b. RepoBench: Benchmarking repository-level
code auto-completion systems. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
ArXiv:2306.03091.

Jai Lal Lulla, Seyedmoein Mohsenimofidi, Matthias
Galster, Jie M. Zhang, Sebastian Baltes, and
Christoph Treude. 2026. On the impact of
AGENTS.md files on the efficiency of AI
coding agents. Preprint, arXiv:2601.20404.
ArXiv:2601.20404.
OpenAI. 2024. Introducing SWE-bench veri-
fied. OpenAI blog post and dataset re-
lease. https://openai.com/index/
introducing-swe-bench-verified/.
Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian
Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E.
Gonzalez. 2023. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as op-
erating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560.
Donald J. Schuirmann. 1987. A comparison of the two
one-sided tests procedure and the power approach
for assessing the equivalence of average bioavail-
ability. Journal of Pharmacokinetics and Biophar-
maceutics, 15(6):657–680.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ash-
win Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu
Yao. 2023. Reflexion: Language agents with
verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
ArXiv:2303.11366.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-
dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
Anima Anandkumar. 2023. Voyager: An open-
ended embodied agent with large language mod-
els. Transactions on Machine Learning Research
(TMLR); arXiv:2305.16291.
Claes Wohlin, Per Runeson, Martin H¨ost, Magnus C.
Ohlsson, Bj¨orn Regnell, and Anders Wessl´en. 2012.
Experimentation in Software Engineering. Springer.
John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kil-
ian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and
Ofir Press. 2024. SWE-agent: Agent-computer in-
terfaces enable automated software engineering. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS). ArXiv:2405.15793.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du,
Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan
Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and
acting in language models. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
ArXiv:2210.03629.
Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jacky Keung,
Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou,
and Weizhu Chen. 2023. RepoCoder: Repository-
level code completion through iterative retrieval and
generation. In Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
ArXiv:2303.12570.
A Experimental Harness Details
Safety layers. Our harness implements
defense-in-depth to prevent the agent from
modifying external state: (1) DNS blackhole
for GitHub (egress lock); (2) git remote
remove on all workspace remotes; (3) git
push/commit/remote denied via PATH
shims and Claude’s --disallowedTools;
(4) GH TOKEN
/GITHUB TOKEN stripped from
environment; (5) future git history pruned (agent
cannot git show the gold commit).
Evaluation pipeline. After agent completion:
(1) capture diff against base sha
; (2) restore
gold test files to base state; (3) apply gold test
patch; (4) run pytest with per-repo configura-
tion; (5) pass iff all gold tests pass with zero fail-
ures/errors.
B Per-Task Results
Figure 2 plots per-task pass-rates for both
agents. The complete per-task pass/fail counts
are available in the supplementary material
(results summary.csv
) alongside the
experiment full.db
 SQLite database.
Opshin full-suite test runs (§4.1). Per-task
blind full-suite pytest counts (NONE / mean-
context) behind Table 2: task 595 2.50/0.75,
task 605 1.20/1.25, task 610 2.50/0.67, task 616
9.33/6.25. Three of four tasks run fewer full-suite
invocations under context; task 605 runs counter
to the trend.
C Reproduction and Data Availability
We release the full experimental harness, the
context-injection strategy implementations
(NONE/ALWAYS ON
/SELECTIVE), the defense-
in-depth safety layer, the task specifications, the
statistical analysis code, the 291-run ablation
dataset (288 evaluated cells) and 36-cell probe
(experiment full.db
, probe codex.db,
probe claude.db), and an aggregated per-
cell results table (results summary.csv).
Raw agent transcripts are available from the
authors on request. The repository is public:
https://github.com/codeprakhar25/
context-files-coding-agents.
# Requires: experiment_full.db
python3 power_analysis.py \
experiment_full.db codex
python3 power_analysis.py \

experiment_full.db claude_code
python3 efficiency_stats_correct.py
