
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2607.12835

Can LLMs Write Reliable Rubrics?
A Meta-Evaluation for Experiment Reproduction
Hanhua Hong
1,2
, Yizhi Li
3
, Jiaoyan Chen
1
,
Luu Gia Huy
5
, Sophia Ananiadou
1,4
, Jung-jae Kim
2
, Chenghua Lin
1
1
The University of Manchester, 
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I²R), A*STAR
3
IQuest Research 
4
ELLIS Manchester, 
5
University of Information Technology, VNU
hanhua.hong@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk, kim_jung_jae@a-star.edu.sg
{jiaoyan.chen,sophia.ananiadou,chenghua.lin}@manchester.ac.uk
Abstract
Rubric-based evaluation is a promising approach
for assessing open-ended outputs from LLM-
based research agents, particularly in paper
reproduction, where direct paper-to-repository
comparison is prone to hallucination. However,
constructing paper-specific rubrics requires
substantial expert effort, limiting the scalability
of benchmarks such as PaperBench. In this work,
we present, to our knowledge, the first systematic
meta-evaluation of LLM-generated rubrics for
paper reproduction. We reformulate rubrics
into a checklist-style format and evaluate four
generation settings across two backbone models.
We meta-evaluate generated rubrics intrinsically
by semantic similarity and extrinsically by score
alignment with ground-truth rubrics. Our results
show that the augmented settings substantially im-
proves downstream evaluation alignment, with the
strongest setting approaching the human baseline,
while intrinsic gains are more modest. Further
analyses reveal that LLM-generated rubrics are
often overly fine-grained, biased toward high
scores, and less adaptive to paper domains,
highlighting both the affordances and limitations.
1 Introduction
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs)
have substantially improved capabilities in code gen-
eration, reasoning, and tool use, driving rapid progress
in LLM-based agents for scientific research (Zhao
et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2025; Yamada et al., 2025;
Lyu et al., 2026b). These agents are increasingly
expected to interpret research papers, design exper-
imental pipelines, and execute computational studies
with minimal human supervision.
Within this workflow, reproducing the experiments
in a paper as an executable code repository remains
one of the most critical and challenging stages (Zhu
et al., 2025). The challenge is particularly severe in
machine learning (ML), where publication pace far
exceeds the release of artefacts, with only around
20% of recent papers at top conferences providing
complete and reproducible codebases (Lin et al., 2022;
Magnusson et al., 2023; Seo et al., 2025). To address
this bottleneck, a growing line of work focuses
on automated paper-to-code generation, including
PaperCoder (Seo et al., 2025), AutoP2C (Lin et al.,
2025), AutoReproduce (Zhao et al., 2025), and
HiRAS (Hong et al., 2026).
However, reliably evaluating these systems is itself
just as challenging, if not more. Direct paper-to-
repository comparison, as adopted in the Paper2Code
benchmark (Seo et al., 2025), is vulnerable to
hallucination, where evaluators incorrectly infer that
described methods have been implemented (Hong
et al., 2026). In contrast, PaperBench (Starace
et al., 2025) introduces rubric-based evaluation:
each paper is paired with a tree-structured rubric
consisting of fine-grained, weighted pass/fail criteria
spanning distinct reproduction stages, and candidate
repositories are assessed independently against each
criterion. Rubric-based evaluation has increasingly
become a common strategy for evaluating open-ended
LLM outputs across domains (Wang et al., 2025;
Arora et al., 2025; Sharma et al., 2025), and has been
shown to yield more reliable judgements than holistic
evaluation (Zhou et al., 2026).
Yet rubric construction has itself emerged as a
major bottleneck. PaperBench rubrics are manually
designed in close collaboration with original paper
authors, requiring substantial human effort while still
covering only 20 papers. The number of criteria per
paper ranges from 94 to 2,551, reflecting the difficulty
of standardising rubric design across diverse papers
and annotators. Similar annotation costs arise in rubric
benchmarks across other domains: HealthBench
required contributions from 262 physicians (Arora
et al., 2025), while ResearchRubrics consumed over
2,800 expert hours (Sharma et al., 2025). At the
same time, LLMs are increasingly used both as
judges operating over fixed rubrics (Zheng et al.,
2023; Gu et al., 2025) and as rubric generators for
1
arXiv:2607.12835v1 [cs.CL] 14 Jul 2026

Figure 1: Overview of our meta-evaluation framework for LLM-generated rubrics in paper reproduction. Given a paper,
reproduction agents generate candidate repositories, while LLMs and human experts produce checklist-style rubrics. We
evaluate generated rubrics intrinsically by measuring their semantic similarity to human-authored rubrics, and extrinsically
by comparing the repository scores they induce with PaperBench evaluations.
Reinforcement Learning reward modelling (Gunjal
et al., 2026). Whether LLMs can also serve as
reliable generators of rubrics for high-stakes paper-
reproduction evaluation, while preserving alignment
with human judgements, remains an open question.
In this work, we investigate this question by first
formulating rubrics in a checklist-style representation,
which is widely adopted in rubric-based evalua-
tion (Sharma et al., 2025; Arora et al., 2025; Wang
et al., 2025). We then study four incrementally
augmented rubric-generation settings, ranging from
direct prompting to in-context examples, agentic
scaffolding, and distilled procedural skills. Finally,
we meta-evaluate the generated rubrics along two
complementary axes: intrinsic alignment with
human-authored rubrics, measured by lexical and
semantic similarity, and extrinsic alignment, measured
by the correlation between repository-level scores
induced by generated and ground-truth rubrics. To our
knowledge, this is the first systematic meta-evaluation
of model-generated rubrics for paper reproduction.
An overview of our work is presented in Figure 1.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold:
• We present a controlled meta-evaluation of
LLMs as rubric authors for ML paper reproduc-
tion on PaperBench, covering four incrementally
augmented generation settings and two back-
bone models. The strongest setting achieves a
Spearman correlation of 0.78 in extrinsic align-
ment, approaching the human baseline of 0.83.
• We show that incremental augmentation substan-
tially improves extrinsic alignment with human
PaperBench evaluations, while intrinsic similar-
ity improves more modestly and is mainly driven
by increased recall, indicating that downstream
evaluation quality depends more on rubric
coverage and granularity than textual similarity.
• We further characterise the limitations of
LLM-generated rubrics through rubric statistics,
score-distribution analysis, category-level
analysis, and qualitative comparison. Our
findings show that generated rubrics are often
more fine-grained, code-centric, and less
adaptive to topic-specific reproduction priorities
than human-authored rubrics.
2 Related Work
2.1 Agent-Based Automatic Research
Recent advances in LLMs have enabled agent-based
systems for automating scientific workflows, from
full-cycle research systems such as AI Scientist (Lu
et al., 2024; Yamada et al., 2025), DOLPHIN (Yuan
et al., 2025), and Zochi (Intology, 2025), to stage-
specific tools for idea generation (Wang et al., 2024;
Li et al., 2025), rigour assessment (James et al., 2024),
and experiment reproduction. In the reproduction
setting, systems such as PaperCoder (Seo et al., 2025),
AutoP2C (Lin et al., 2025), AutoReproduce (Zhao
et al., 2025), and HiRAS (Hong et al., 2026) aim to
reconstruct codebases from research papers.
Alongside these systems, benchmarks such
as MLS-Bench (Lyu et al., 2026a), SciRepli-
cateBench (Xiang et al., 2025), and Paper-
Bench (Starace et al., 2025) have been proposed to
evaluate scientific agents. While these benchmarks
improve evaluation reliability, they also expose a key
2

bottleneck: they require fine-grained, expert criteria
which are normally not available . Our addresses this
bottleneck by systematically investigating whether
LLMs can generate paper-specific rubrics aligned
with human-authored evaluations.
2.2 Rubric-Based Evaluation
Rubrics have recently gained attention as structured su-
pervision signals that decompose complex goals into
fine-grained criteria. In LLM post-training, instance-
specific rubrics have been used as reward signals to
extend Reinforcement Learning beyond verifiable
domains such as mathematics and coding (Gunjal
et al., 2026), while recent work explores scalable
synthetic rubric generation for reward modelling and
alignment (Liu et al., 2026). Rubrics also support
structured evaluation by replacing holistic judgments
with explicit criteria. In paper reproduction, Paper-
Bench pairs each paper with a hierarchical rubric co-
developed with original authors (Starace et al., 2025),
and similar protocols have been adopted in Health-
Bench, ProfBench, and ResearchRubrics (Arora et al.,
2025; Wang et al., 2025; Sharma et al., 2025).
Despite their value, rubrics remain expensive to
construct and difficult to standardise. PaperBench
covers only 20 papers, while HealthBench required
rubrics from 262 physicians (Starace et al., 2025;
Arora et al., 2025). This has motivated work on model-
generated rubrics and rubric-guided benchmarks,
such as RubricBench (Zhou et al., 2026). Our work
studies this problem in paper reproduction, where
rubric quality depends not only on textual plausibility
but also on its ability to induce repository-level
evaluations aligned with human-authored rubrics.
2.3 Meta-Evaluation
Meta-evaluation studies whether evaluation methods
themselves are reliable and aligned with human
judgments. This issue has become central as
LLMs are increasingly used as automatic judges for
open-ended generation. Prior studies such as G-Eval
(Liu et al., 2023) show that prompting LLMs with
explicit evaluation criteria can improve correlation
with human judgments, while LLM-as-a-judge
studies and surveys identify important reliability
concerns, including verbosity bias, position bias,
self-preference, and inconsistency (Liu et al., 2023;
Zheng et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2025).
For rubric-based evaluation, both the evaluator
and the rubric itself are critical. PaperBench
compares human and LLM evaluators under fixed
human-authored rubrics, while RubricBench pri-
Algorithm 1 Algorithm for the Agentic Scaffold
Input: Backbone Model LLM; Initial Prompt p
0
; Workspace
W ={P,E}
Output: Ending Report Report; Updated Workspace W ;
1: Mem←p
0
.
2: while True do
3: Reasoning,Action←LLM(Mem).
4: Mem←Mem∪{(Reasoning,Action)}.
5: if Action∈SystemTools then
6: Result,W ←system.call(Action).
7: Mem←Mem∪{Result}.
8: else if Action="End" then
9: break
10: end if
11: end while
12: Report←Mem
13: return Report,W .
marily assesses evaluators under different rubric
sources in Reinforcement Learning reward modelling
settings, with limited analysis of rubric generation
itself (Starace et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2026). In
contrast, our work directly focuses on meta-evaluating
rubric generation for paper reproduction, exploring
incrementally augmented generation settings through
both intrinsic and extrinsic meta-evaluation.
3 Methodology
3.1 Problem Definition
In this work, we represent rubrics in a checklist-style
format. Each rubric item r
i 
consists of a criterion c
i
and an associated importance score, s
i 
ranging from
1 to 5, resulting in r
i 
= (c
i
,s
i
). For a paper P, the
complete rubric set is defined as R={r
1
,r
2
,...,r
n
}.
To evaluate whether a repository faithfully
reproduces the experiments in the paper, the
evaluator examines each rubric criterion indepen-
dently and assigns a binary judgement, denoted as
f :c
i 
→Pass/Fail. The final reproduction score of the
paper is computed as the weighted sum of all passed
criteria, normalised by the total rubric score:
score=
P
i
[f(c
i
)=Pass]·s
i
P
i
s
i
, (1)
where [·] returns 1 if the condition is satisfied and 0
otherwise.
3.2 Rubric Generation
We study rubric generation under four incrementally
augmented generation settings designed to improve
the quality and reliability of LLM-authored rubrics.
Each setting builds on the previous one by introducing
an additional form of augmentation.
3

Direct Prompting. In the base setting, the model
is directly prompted with the target paper P and a
manually designed instruction set I that specifies the
checklist-style rubric format and scoring standards.
We denote the resulting prompt as p
DP 
= (I, P).
The model then generates the complete rubric in a
single pass.
In-Context Examples. Building on Direct Prompt-
ing, we additionally provide human-authored
rubric examples E from other papers as in-context
demonstrations. These examples expose the model to
the desired rubric structure, criterion granularity, and
score allocation patterns, encouraging more consistent
and human-aligned rubric generation. We denote the
resulting prompt as p
IE 
=(I,P,E).
Agentic Scaffold. The third setting introduces an
agentic scaffold following the ReAct paradigm (Yao
et al., 2023). Rather than generating the entire rubric
in a single response, the model iteratively reasons over
the task, inspects intermediate outputs, and refines
the generated criteria across multiple interaction
steps. The agent starts with an initial prompt p
0 
=(I)
and operates in a workspace W = {P, E}, which
initially contains the target paper and in-context
examples. The final generated rubric will also be
stored in this workspace. The agent is equipped with
system tools such as Read and Write, enabling it
to access relevant files and save intermediate or final
outputs during rubric generation. The full procedure
is provided in Algorithm 1.
Distilled Skill. Finally, we augment the generation
process with a distilled procedural skill extracted from
a stronger model. Instead of using the stronger model
to generate rubrics for every target paper, which would
incur substantial computational cost, we run it only
once on a single paper under the Agentic Scaffold
setting. After this run, the agent is further prompted to
summarise its rubric-construction procedure, heuris-
tics, and decision patterns into a general-purpose skill
document S. This distilled skill is then incorporated
into the prompt of the weaker model and reused to
guide rubric generation for all papers. This setting
also follows the agentic procedure, with the initial
prompt p
0 
=(I,S) and workspace W ={P,E}.
These four settings form a controlled augmentation
hierarchy, enabling us to systematically analyse how
progressively stronger forms of supervision and
reasoning support affect the quality and evaluation
behaviour of generated rubrics. The prompt details
are provided in Appendix A.
3.3 Meta-Evaluation Metrics
We conduct meta-evaluation from two complementary
perspectives. Extrinsic meta-evaluation assesses
whether generated rubrics induce repository-level
evaluation outcomes consistent with those obtained
using ground-truth rubrics. Intrinsic meta-evaluation
measures the lexical and semantic alignment between
model-generated and human-authored rubrics.
Extrinsic Meta-Evaluation. For extrinsic evalua-
tion, we measure the alignment between generated
and ground-truth rubrics through their induced
repository-level evaluation outcomes. For each
paper, we collect multiple reproduction repositories
and evaluate them with the same LLM-based
evaluator under different rubric sets. To fit within the
context limit, for each rubric criterion, the evaluator
first retrieves the top-K most relevant files from
the repository and then assigns a binary pass/fail
judgment based on the retrieved contents.
We quantify outcome alignment using both
Spearman and Pearson correlation coefficients. Given
m repositories, let D = {d
1
, ... , d
m
} denote the
repository set for a paper. The repository-level score
vectors induced by the generated rubric R and the
ground-truth rubric GT are defined as:
s
R 
=⟨Eval(d
i
,R)⟩
m
i=1
,
s
GT 
=⟨Eval(d
i
,GT)⟩
m
i=1
. 
(2)
We then compute, for example, the Spearman
correlation between the two score vectors:
ρ=Spearman

s
R
,s
GT

. (3)
The final extrinsic alignment score is obtained
by averaging the correlation coefficients across all
evaluated papers in PaperBench.
Intrinsic Meta-Evaluation. We evaluate intrinsic
alignment at both lexical and semantic levels. At
the lexical level, for each generated rubric item, we
compute its maximum ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-L
scores (Lin, 2004) against all ground-truth rubric
items for the same paper, and then average the scores
across papers.
At the semantic level, following Zhou et al.
(2026), we measure matching precision, recall, and
F1 between the generated rubric set R = {r
i
}
|R|
i=1
,
where r
i 
= (c
i
,s
i
), and the ground-truth rubric set
GT={gt
j
}
|GT|
j=1 
, where gt
j 
=(c
gt
j 
,s
gt
j 
). Unlike Zhou
et al. (2026), which relies on LLM-based matching,
we use embedding cosine similarity (Reimers and
Gurevych, 2019) to identify criterion matches, thereby
reducing the risk of hallucinations:
match(c
i
,c
gt
j 
)=[cos(c
i
,c
gt
j 
)>τ], (4)
4

Method Backbone Model 
Correlation Coefficients Average Statistics
Pearson Spearman avg. count avg. len avg. tokens
Human Annotation - 0.83 0.75 83.20 131.73 29.49
Direct Prompting
Claude-Sonnet
0.62 0.58 35.95 185.41 45.05
+In-Context Examples 0.70 0.65 56.30 158.80 38.42
+Agentic Scaffold 0.73 0.67 57.85 140.30 33.97
+Distilled Skill 0.78 0.70 77.95 171.85 40.87
Direct Prompting
GPT-5.4
0.55 0.55 50.15 190.30 37.75
+In-Context Examples 0.56 0.55 61.80 165.65 33.43
+Agentic Scaffold 0.60 0.63 57.60 156.15 32.05
+Distilled Skill 0.74 0.70 87.15 138.70 29.58
Table 1: Extrinsic meta-evaluation results. For Spearman and Pearson correlations, bold values indicate the best perfor-
mance of each model. For average rubric statistics, bold values indicate the closest match to the human baseline. Incremental
augmentations generally improve alignment with human PaperBench evaluations and increase rubric count. The Distilled
Skill setting achieves the strongest model-generated performance, approaching the Human Annotation baseline.
where τ is a predefined similarity threshold.
A generated criterion is considered matched if it
matches at least one ground-truth criterion , while a
ground-truth criterion is considered covered if it is
matched by at least one generated criterion. Precision,
recall, and F1 are computed as:
Precision=
P
i
h
P
j
match(c
i
,c
gt
j 
)≥1
i
|R| 
, (5)
Recall=
P
j
h
P
i
match(c
i
,c
gt
j 
)≥1
i
|GT| 
, (6)
F1= 
2·Precision·Recall
Precision+Recall 
. (7)
All semantic metrics are also computed per paper
and then averaged across all evaluated papers in
PaperBench.
4 Experiments
Models. For rubric generation, we use Claude-
Sonnet 
and GPT-5.4 to generate rubrics for all
settings included in the meta-evaluation. Skill
distillation is conducted with Claude-Opus (Singh
et al., 2026; Anthropic, 2026b,c). For evaluators,
we use ChatGPT-4o-mini to assign scores to each
repository according to the rubrics (OpenAI, 2024).
In addition, we use Qwen3-Embedding-8B (Zhang
et al., 2025) to calculate the cosine similarity for the
intrinsic meta-evaluation.
Baselines. For comparison, we also manually
re-annotated the PaperBench papers in checklist-style
format to evaluate how human-authored rubrics align
with the ground-truth rubrics of PaperBench. This
serves as a human baseline, which is denoted as
Human Annotation in the main result tables. For the
In-Context Examples setting, we add one set of our
human-authored rubrics in to the prompt to instruct
model to generate rubrics in the similar format. For
the Agentic Scaffold setting, we use the Claude
Code scaffold (Anthropic, 2026a).
Repositories. For extrinsic meta-evaluation, we use
five reproduction repositories generated by prior agent-
based paper-reproduction systems. These repositories
are produced under configurations of PaperCoder
and HiRAS: PaperCoder is run with DeepSeek-V3
and Qwen3-Coder-480B, while HiRAS is run with
Claude-Sonnet, DeepSeek-V3, and Qwen3-Coder-
480B (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025).
Environment. All experiments are conducted using
eight NVIDIA L40S GPUs. For repository evaluation,
the evaluator retrieves the top-K = 10 most relevant
files for each rubric criterion. For semantic matching,
we set the similarity threshold to τ =0.7 in the main
experiments. Our key findings are not sensitive to this
choice: varying τ within a reasonable range preserves
the same overall trends across augmentation levels
to rubric generation. Additional threshold-sensitivity
results are provided in Appendix D.
4.1 Extrinsic Meta-Evaluation Results
Table 1 presents the extrinsic meta-evaluation results
under incrementally augmented rubric-generation
settings. Overall, each augmentation step improves
the alignment between model-generated and
human-authored rubrics across both model families,
validating the effectiveness of the proposed aug-
mentation hierarchy. In particular, the full Distilled
Skill setting achieves the strongest model-generated
performance for both Claude-Sonnet and GPT-5.4,
indicating that the proposed augmentations generalise
across different backbone models.
For Claude-Sonnet, Direct Prompting yields sub-
stantially lower alignment than the human-annotation
baseline, with a significant drop of approximately 0.2
5

Method Backbone Model 
Cosine Similarity avg. Max ROUGE
Precision Recall F1 ROUGE-1 ROUGE-L
Human Annotation - 0.79 0.62 0.69 0.46 0.39
Direct Prompting
Claude-Sonnet
0.76 0.58 0.63 0.38 0.29
+In-Context Examples 0.74 0.60 0.65 0.39 0.31
+Agentic Scaffold 0.71 0.61 0.64 0.39 0.31
+Distilled Skill 0.74 0.65 0.68 0.41 0.32
Direct Prompting
GPT-5.4
0.69 0.49 0.55 0.35 0.27
+In-Context Examples 0.67 0.55 0.59 0.37 0.29
+Agentic Scaffold 0.72 0.56 0.62 0.38 0.30
+Distilled Skill 0.67 0.61 0.62 0.39 0.31
Table 2: Intrinsic meta-evaluation results. Bold values denote the best performance for each model. Incremental
augmentations generally improve lexical overlap and semantic matching with human-authored rubrics. The gains are
most evident in cosine-similarity recall, F1, and ROUGE scores, indicating improved coverage of human-specified criteria,
while precision generally fluctuates across settings.
in both Spearman and Pearson correlations. As in-
context examples, agentic scaffolding, and distilled
procedural skill are introduced, the correlations im-
prove monotonically, demonstrating that each com-
ponent contributes to stronger repository-level evalua-
tion alignment. Compared with Direct Prompting, the
Distilled Skill setting improves Spearman correlation
by approximately 26% and Pearson correlation by ap-
proximately 21%, bringing the induced evaluation out-
comes close to those obtained with human-authored
rubrics. A similar pattern is observed for GPT-5.4.
Although direct prompting starts from weaker align-
ment, performance increases as the augmentation
level grows and reaches its best result under the Dis-
tilled Skill setting. Relative to direct prompting, Dis-
tilled Skill improves Spearman correlation by approxi-
mately 35% and Pearson correlation by approximately
27%, yielding near-human performance and matching
the best model-generated Pearson correlation. The
initial drop of Direct Prompting is consistent with
prior findings that naive LLM involvement in rubric
construction can substantially degrade evaluation qual-
ity (Sharma et al., 2025). Nevertheless, our results
further show that proposed augmentations can substan-
tially improve rubric quality, enabling current LLMs
to induce repository-level evaluation outcomes that
approach those obtained with human-authored rubrics.
We also report rubric statistics in Table 1. Incre-
mental augmentations also substantially increase
rubric quantities, with the average number of criteria
rising from 35.95 to 77.95 for Claude-Sonnet and
from 50.15 to 87.15 for GPT-5.4. These counts
approach, or even slightly exceed, the human average
of 83.20, indicating that stronger generation settings
produce more comprehensive rubric sets. However,
model-generated criteria remain generally longer
than human-authored ones, reflecting a length bias
in LLM generation (Hu et al., 2025; Bu et al., 2025).
Human annotations tend to aggregate implementation
details into concise high-level criteria, whereas
model-generated rubrics more often decompose them
into fine-grained operational steps. This difference
is further illustrated with the case study in §5.3.
4.2 Intrinsic Meta-Evaluation Results
Table 2 presents the intrinsic meta-evaluation
results. Overall, stronger augmentation improves
the intrinsic alignment between model-generated
and human-authored rubrics. Both ROUGE-1
and ROUGE-L increase consistently from Direct
Prompting to the Distilled Skill setting for both
models, indicating that augmented generation
produces rubric items with greater lexical overlap
with human-authored criteria. The cosine-similarity
F1 score also generally improves across augmentation
levels, mainly driven by increased recall, showing
that stronger augmentation settings primarily improve
coverage of ground-truth rubric criteria.
For Claude-Sonnet, the Distilled Skill setting
improves cosine-similarity F1 by approximately 8%
relative to Direct Prompting, while ROUGE-1 and
ROUGE-L improve by approximately 8% and 10%,
respectively. For GPT-5.4, the gains are more pro-
nounced: Distilled Skill improves cosine-similarity F1
by approximately 13%, ROUGE-1 by approximately
11%, and ROUGE-L by approximately 15% over
direct prompting. These improvements suggest that
incremental augmentations not only enhance down-
stream evaluation alignment, but also make generated
rubrics intrinsically closer to human-authored rubrics.
At the same time, the intrinsic gains are less pro-
nounced than the extrinsic improvements. Precision
fluctuates across settings but remains close to the hu-
man baseline. This may imply that models can already
6

(a) PaperBench Rubrics (b) Model-Generated Rubrics
Figure 2: Score proportions by rubric type across paper categories. Compared with the ground-truth PaperBench rubrics,
model-generated rubrics from Claude-Sonnet under the Distilled Skill setting show more uniform distributions and
assign consistently higher weight to Code Development rubrics, indicating a code-centric bias and weaker adaptation
to topic-specific reproduction
generate semantically valid criteria. However, taken
together with lower recall and longer rubrics in Table 1,
this pattern indicates a tendency toward overly fine-
grained criteria, which limit models’ holistic coverage
of the ground-truth rubric. The main improvement in
cosine-similarity matching comes from recall, which
further suggests that augmentations help mitigate this
granularity issue by improving the coverage of repro-
duction criteria. Overall, the intrinsic results show that
augmentation improves textual alignment and seman-
tic coverage, while the remaining gap to human anno-
tations reflects differences in coverage and granularity.
5 Further Analysis
5.1 Paper Category Analysis
To examine topic-level differences, we group the
PaperBench papers into four categories: (A) Lan-
guage Model Adaptation and Alignment (5 papers);
(B) Vision and Vision-Language Models (5 papers);
(C) Reinforcement Learning (4 papers), and (D)
Probabilistic and Mathematical ML (6 papers). The
detailed categorisation is provided in Appendix C.
PaperBench divides rubric criteria into three types:
Code Development, Execution, and Result Match. We
follow this taxonomy and compute the proportion of
total score assigned to each type within each category.
Figure 2 compares the ground-truth PaperBench
rubrics with those generated by Claude-Sonnet
under the Distilled Skill setting.
The ground-truth rubrics show clear category-
dependent variation. In particular, Result Match ac-
counts for 48.8% of the score in Reinforcement Learn-
ing papers, indicating that human rubrics place greater
emphasis on empirical outcomes in the Reinforcement
Learning domain, where the generalisation under
different circumstances is critical. In contrast, model-
generated rubrics are much more uniform across cat-
egories: Code Development consistently receives over
60% of the total score, while Result Match remains be-
low 21%. This reveals a systematic code-centric bias
in model-generated rubrics. After further inspection,
the bias can be attributed to that the model tends to de-
compose implementation procedures into fine-grained
steps and assign them substantial weights to even the
finest granularity. Overall, these results show that
LLM-generated rubrics are structurally consistent but
less adaptive to topic-specific reproduction priorities.
5.2 Score Distribution Analysis
Figure 6 in Appendix B illustrates the importance-
score distributions under different rubric-generation
settings with Claude-Sonnet. Direct Prompting
produces a noticeably skewed distribution, with
scores concentrated at higher importance levels and
limited coverage of lower-scored criteria, suggesting
that naive prompting tends to overestimate criterion
importance. As in-context examples, agentic
scaffolding, and the distilled skill are introduced,
the distributions become bell-shaped and more
balanced across the 1–5 range, suggesting improved
score calibration. Nevertheless, all model-generated
settings still show a mild bias toward higher scores.
7

Criterion Score
Human-authored rubrics
The collection and processing of the Wikitext-2 dataset as prompts are planned. 2
The construction of a pairwise toxicity dataset using PPLM is planned. 2
The DPO process for GPT2 and Llama2 with the pairwise toxicity dataset is planned. 4
The code for the construction of a pairwise toxicity dataset using PPLM has been implemented. 3
The code for the DPO process for GPT2 and Llama2 with the pairwise toxicity dataset has been implemented. 5
The hyperparameters for DPO and PPLM have been set as in Appendix E. 1
The un-aligning DPO experiment on GPT2-DPO matches Table 4: toxicity, perplexity, and F1 increase after scaling
up toxic key vectors.
5
Model-generated rubrics
The plan includes building 24,576 pairwise preference samples using Wikitext-2 prompts: greedy GPT2 sampling for
positive continuations and PPLM for negative continuations.
3
The plan includes training DPO on GPT2-medium and Llama2-7b with learning rate 10
−6
, batch size 4, RMSProp
optimizer, β =0.1, and validation patience 10.
3
The code implements the DPO loss, where positive and negative continuation likelihood ratios are compared against
the reference model.
5
The code trains DPO on GPT2-medium using the pairwise dataset with the specified hyperparameters. 5
The code implements PPLM with all specified hyperparameters, including step size, top-k, iterations, GM scale, and
KL scale.
3
The un-alignment experiment on GPT2-DPO by scaling the top 7 toxic key vectors by 10× has been implemented. 4
The execution outcomes match Table 4: scaling toxic key vectors reverts toxicity while preserving PPL and F1. 4
Table 3: Qualitative comparison between human-authored and model-generated rubrics for the same DPO un-alignment
experiment. The model-generated rubrics are extracted from the Distilled Skill setting with Claude-Sonnet. They are
more fine-grained and assign relatively high scores to auxiliary details, whereas the human-authored rubrics use general,
concise criteria with more discriminative score allocation.
Overall, stronger procedural guidance improves
importance-score calibration, but score overestimation
remains a persistent limitation.
5.3 Qualitative Analysis
To further characterise the generated rubrics, we
inspect the outputs of the best-performing Distilled
Skill setting on Claude-Sonnet and compare them
with human-authored rubrics in Table 4. The table
presents matched rubric segments for the same DPO
un-alignment experiment from A Mechanistic Under-
standing of Alignment Algorithms: A Case Study on
DPO and Toxicity (Lee et al., 2024), one of the papers
included in PaperBench. We select this example
because both rubrics target the same experiment, yet
exhibit substantial differences in criterion granularity,
score assignment, and overall rubric construction.
The model-generated rubric describes the exper-
iment at a lower operational level, decomposing
a single reproduction component into multiple
fine-grained checks. It also explicitly specifies
implementation details such as the number of samples
in the dataset, and detailed hyperparameter values.
In contrast, the human-authored rubric uses more
concise, higher-level criteria that focus on core
reproduction milestones, such as constructing the
pairwise toxicity dataset, implementing DPO, and
reproducing the un-alignment results. Peripheral
details, such as hyperparameter settings, are aggre-
gated into a separate low-weight criterion. In addition,
the model-generated rubrics are assigned relatively
higher scores than their human-authored counterpart.
This example reinforces our previous findings that
model-generated rubrics are generally longer, more
fine-grained, and more likely to assign high scores
to coding-level details than human-authored rubrics.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we studied whether LLMs can
serve as reliable rubric authors for scalable and
high-quality paper-reproduction evaluation. We
manually re-annotated rubrics for PaperBench into
a checklist-style format as a baseline and evaluated
LLM-generated rubrics under four progressively
augmented settings, using both intrinsic textual
alignment and extrinsic repository-level alignment
with human PaperBench judgments. Our results show
that proposed augmentations substantially improves
the downstream utility of generated rubrics, with the
best setting achieving the strongest model-generated
performance and approaching the human baseline.
Intrinsic improvements are more modest and mainly
driven by recall, suggesting that augmentation
primarily expands coverage of ground-truth rubrics.
Further analyses show that model-generated rubrics
remain more verbose, fine-grained, and code-centric
than human-authored rubrics, with less paper topic
sensitivity and calibrated weighting.
8

Limitations
Our work focuses on the reproduction of machine
learning papers, using the currently prevalent
PaperBench benchmark as the testbed. Therefore, the
generalisation of our findings to other scientific do-
mains remains uncertain, as experimental workflows
and reproduction requirements may vary substantially
across fields. The evaluation scale is also limited by
the size of PaperBench and the availability of models
and reproduction repositories. In addition, rubric
quality may still vary with different prompt design,
in-context examples, and the implementation details
of the agentic scaffold.
Ethical Considerations
All data used in this work are collected from publicly
available sources. Our goal is to support more
reliable evaluation and reproduction of prior research,
rather than to replace the creative, critical, and
interpretive roles of human researchers. The proposed
rubric-generation framework should therefore be
viewed as an assistive tool for scalable evaluation,
with human oversight remaining important in high-
stakes scientific assessment. All human annotations
and benchmark reformulations were conducted by
research students with sufficient experience.
References
Anthropic. 2026a. Claude code overview.
Anthropic. 2026b. Claude-opus system card.
Anthropic. 2026c. Claude-sonnet system card.
Rahul K. Arora, Jason Wei, Rebecca Soskin Hicks,
Preston Bowman, Joaquin Quiñonero-Candela, Foivos
Tsimpourlas, Michael Sharman, Meghan Shah, Andrea
Vallone, Alex Beutel, Johannes Heidecke, and Karan
Singhal. 2025. Healthbench: Evaluating large language
models towards improved human health. Preprint,
arXiv:2505.08775.
Yuyan Bu, Liangyu Huo, Yi Jing, and Qing Yang. 2025.
Beyond excess and deficiency: Adaptive length bias
mitigation in reward models for RLHF. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL
2025, pages 3091–3098, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan
Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao,
Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai
Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie
Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo,
Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang,
Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Haowei Zhang,
Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li, Hui
Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi
Li, Jiawei Wang, Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang
Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong,
Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu,
Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang
Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun
Wang, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui
Tang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peiyi
Wang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu,
Qinyu Chen, and Qiushi Du et al. 2025. Deepseek-v3
technical report. Preprint, arXiv:2412.19437.
Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao
Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma,
Honghao Liu, Saizhuo Wang, Kun Zhang, Yuanzhuo
Wang, Wen Gao, Lionel Ni, and Jian Guo. 2025. A
survey on llm-as-a-judge. Preprint, arXiv:2411.15594.
Anisha Gunjal, Anthony Wang, Elaine Lau, Vaskar Nath,
Yunzhong He, Bing Liu, and Sean M. Hendryx. 2026.
Rubrics as rewards: Reinforcement learning beyond
verifiable domains. In The Fourteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Hanhua Hong, Yizhi LI, Jiaoyan Chen, Sophia Ananiadou,
Xiaoli Li, Jung jae Kim, and Chenghua Lin. 2026. Hiras:
A hierarchical multi-agent framework for paper-to-code
generation and execution. Preprint, arXiv:2604.17745.
Zhengyu Hu, Linxin Song, Jieyu Zhang, Zheyuan Xiao,
Tianfu Wang, Zhengyu Chen, Nicholas Jing Yuan,
Jianxun Lian, Kaize Ding, and Hui Xiong. 2025.
Explaining length bias in LLM-based preference evalua-
tions. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2025, pages 6763–6794, Suzhou,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Intology. 2025. Zochi technical report.
Joseph James, Chenghao Xiao, Yucheng Li, and Chenghua
Lin. 2024. On the rigour of scientific writing: Criteria,
analysis, and insights. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pages
6523–6538, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Andrew Lee, Xiaoyan Bai, Itamar Pres, Martin Wattenberg,
Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, and Rada Mihalcea. 2024.
A mechanistic understanding of alignment algorithms:
a case study on dpo and toxicity. In Proceedings of the
41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML’24. JMLR.org.
Long Li, Weiwen Xu, Jiayan Guo, Ruochen Zhao,
Xingxuan Li, Yuqian Yuan, Boqiang Zhang, Yuming
Jiang, Yifei Xin, Ronghao Dang, Yu Rong, Deli
Zhao, Tian Feng, and Lidong Bing. 2025. Chain
of ideas: Revolutionizing research via novel idea
development with LLM agents. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2025, pages 8971–9004, Suzhou, China. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for automatic
evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization
9

Branches Out, pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jialiang Lin, Yingmin Wang, Yao Yu, Yu Zhou, Yidong
Chen, and Xiaodong Shi. 2022. Automatic analysis of
available source code of top artificial intelligence con-
ference papers. International Journal of Software Engi-
neering and Knowledge Engineering, 32(07):947–970.
Zijie Lin, Yiqing Shen, Qilin Cai, He Sun, Jinrui Zhou,
and Mingjun Xiao. 2025. Autop2c: An llm-based
agent framework for code repository generation from
multimodal content in academic papers. Preprint,
arXiv:2504.20115.
Tianci Liu, Ran Xu, Tony Yu, Ilgee Hong, Carl Yang, Tuo
Zhao, and Haoyu Wang. 2026. Openrubrics: Towards
scalable synthetic rubric generation for reward modeling
and llm alignment. Preprint, arXiv:2510.07743.
Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang,
Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. G-eval: NLG
evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment. In
Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2511–2522,
Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob N.
Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. 2024. The ai
scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific
discovery. CoRR, abs/2408.06292.
Bohan Lyu, Yucheng Yang, Siqiao Huang, Jiaru Zhang,
Qixin Xu, Xinghan Li, Xinyang Han, Yicheng Zhang,
Huaqing Zhang, Runhan Huang, Kaicheng Yang, Zitao
Chen, Wentao Guo, Junlin Yang, Xinyue Ai, Wenhao
Chai, Yadi Cao, Ziran Yang, Kun Wang, Dapeng Jiang,
Huan ang Gao, Shange Tang, Chengshuai Shi, Simon S.
Du, Max Simchowitz, Jiantao Jiao, Dawn Song, and
Chi Jin. 2026a. Mls-bench: A holistic and rigorous
assessment of ai systems on building better ai. Preprint,
arXiv:2605.08678.
Yougang Lyu, Xi Zhang, Xinhao Yi, Yuyue Zhao, Shuyu
Guo, Wenxiang Hu, Jan Piotrowski, Jakub Kaliski,
Jacopo Urbani, Zaiqiao Meng, Lun Zhou, and Xiaohui
Yan. 2026b. Evoscientist: Towards multi-agent
evolving ai scientists for end-to-end scientific discovery.
Preprint, arXiv:2603.08127.
Ian Magnusson, Noah A. Smith, and Jesse Dodge. 2023.
Reproducibility in NLP: What have we learned from
the checklist? In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages 12789–
12811, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
OpenAI. 2024. Gpt-4o system card. Preprint,
arXiv:2410.21276.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT:
Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3982–3992,
Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Minju Seo, Jinheon Baek, Seongyun Lee, and Sung Ju
Hwang. 2025. Paper2code: Automating code gen-
eration from scientific papers in machine learning.
Preprint, arXiv:2504.17192.
Manasi Sharma, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Chaithanya
Bandi, Clinton Wang, Ankit Aich, Huy Nghiem,
Tahseen Rabbani, Ye Htet, Brian Jang, Sumana Basu,
Aishwarya Balwani, Denis Peskoff, Marcos Ayestaran,
Sean M. Hendryx, Brad Kenstler, and Bing Liu.
2025. Researchrubrics: A benchmark of prompts and
rubrics for evaluating deep research agents. Preprint,
arXiv:2511.07685.
Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart,
Adi Ganesh, et al. 2026. Openai gpt-5 system card.
Preprint, arXiv:2601.03267.
Giulio Starace, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, James Aung,
Jun Shern Chan, Leon Maksin, Rachel Dias, Evan
Mays, Benjamin Kinsella, Wyatt Thompson, Johannes
Heidecke, Amelia Glaese, and Tejal Patwardhan. 2025.
Paperbench: Evaluating ai’s ability to replicate ai
research. Preprint, arXiv:2504.01848.
Qingyun Wang, Doug Downey, Heng Ji, and Tom Hope.
2024. SciMON: Scientific inspiration machines opti-
mized for novelty. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 279–299, Bangkok,
Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhilin Wang, Jaehun Jung, Ximing Lu, Shizhe Diao, Ellie
Evans, Jiaqi Zeng, Pavlo Molchanov, Yejin Choi, Jan
Kautz, and Yi Dong. 2025. Profbench: Multi-domain
rubrics requiring professional knowledge to answer and
judge. Preprint, arXiv:2510.18941.
Yanzheng Xiang, Hanqi Yan, Shuyin Ouyang, Lin Gui,
and Yulan He. 2025. Scireplicate-bench: Benchmarking
LLMs in agent-driven algorithmic reproduction from
research papers. In Second Conference on Language
Modeling.
Yutaro Yamada, Robert Tjarko Lange, Cong Lu, Shengran
Hu, Chris Lu, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha.
2025. The ai scientist-v2: Workshop-level automated
scientific discovery via agentic tree search. Preprint,
arXiv:2504.08066.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, and Bowen Yu et al. 2025.
Qwen3 technical report. Preprint, arXiv:2505.09388.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models. In The Eleventh International Conference on
Learning Representations.
Jiakang Yuan, Xiangchao Yan, Bo Zhang, Tao Chen, Bo-
tian Shi, Wanli Ouyang, Yu Qiao, Lei Bai, and Bowen
Zhou. 2025. Dolphin: Moving towards closed-loop
10

auto-research through thinking, practice, and feedback.
In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 21768–21789, Vienna, Austria.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang,
Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang,
Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren
Zhou. 2025. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text
embedding and reranking through foundation models.
Preprint, arXiv:2506.05176.
Xuanle Zhao, Zilin Sang, Yuxuan Li, Qi Shi, Weilun Zhao,
Shuo Wang, Duzhen Zhang, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu,
and Maosong Sun. 2025. Autoreproduce: Automatic ai
experiment reproduction with paper lineage. Preprint,
arXiv:2505.20662.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging
LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena.
In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
Junyi Zhou, Qiyuan Zhang, Yufei Wang, Fuyuan Lyu,
Yidong Ming, Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Peng
Kang, Xue Liu, and Chen Ma. 2026. RubricBench:
Aligning model-generated rubrics with human standards.
In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 31179–31200, San Diego, Cali-
fornia, United States. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Minjun Zhu, Qiujie Xie, Yixuan Weng, Jian Wu, Zhen
Lin, Linyi Yang, and Yue Zhang. 2025. Ai scientists
fail without strong implementation capability. Preprint,
arXiv:2506.01372.
11

A Prompt Details
You are a serious examiner of experiment reproduction. Now you are given a paper. You task is to read the entire paper and
then give a set of rubrics to determine whether the paper is reproduced correctly. Please make sure you read and understand
these instructions carefully.
# Paper: {paper_content}
# Instructions:
1. Please read the paper carefully and then give a set of rubrics to determine whether the paper is reproduced correctly.
2. You must focus on the core contents about methodology and experiment settings of the paper, and the criteria in your
rubric should be very critical and specific.
3. The rubrics should be as comprehensive as possible, making sure it can reflect all the implementation details of the paper.
4. Your final target is to evaluate the reproduction of a codebase according to the paper. Thus, your rubrics should be able
to be validated with the codebase.
5. Each rubric should contain a single criteria and a score ranged from 1 to 5 according to its importance in the reproduction.
6. Do not output anything else except the JSON rubrics.
# Score Standard:
The score you assign to each criteria should be based on the following standard:
1 Not Important: This criteria only reflects a very minor detail of the paper, or is not closely related to the code implementation.
The reproduction will still be executable even if this criteria is not met. (e.g. mentioning some specific hyperparameters in plans)
2 Less Important: This criteria is generally less important in terms of implementation, but the reproduction will be significantly
affected if this criteria is not met, especially in the early stages of the reproduction. (e.g. reading the whole paper and
understanding the overall methodology)
3 Important: This criteria is important during the reproduction, greatly influence the whole reproduction process and the
final result. The final outcome will be significantly affected if this criteria is not met. (e.g. planning the repository architecture
or each of the experiment settings in detail)
4 Very Important: This criteria describes a key step, component, or function in the reproduction according to the paper. It
is an essential part of the implementation, the repository would not be executable if this criteria is not met. (e.g. coding
part of a component or a useful cuntion, implementing a specific experiment setting, etc.)
5 Critical: This criteria is one of the most important standard to measure whether a reproduction is successful. The reproduction
will not be considered complete if this requirement is not met or there are missing points for this criteria. (e.g. coding the key
method from the paper or a critical component for the whole reproduction to be executable, running the main experiments, etc.)
# Rubrics Design Steps:
1. Read the full paper: You need to first read the full paper carefully and understand the overall methodology and experiment
settings. Do not miss even a single detail, and make sure you have a clear understanding of how the paper is implemented.
2. Analyse the related sections: Based on your understanding of the paper, analyse the related sections that are closely related
to the reproduction. For example, the methodology section, the experiment settings section, the results section, the discussion
section, etc.
3. Extract key process: For each experiment mentioned in the paper, extract the key components, algorithm, or function
that is essential for the reproduction. They must be constructed in the codebase, and multiple rubrics may be introduced
to examine each step of the implementation of these key processes.
4. Articulate the criteria: You will be required to articulate the criteria for all detailed steps of the reproduction. Please make
sure your rubrics cover all stages and details of the reproduction, and each criteria should be specific and clear, which is
able to evaluate the reproduction with the codebase.
5. Assign the score: Based on the importance of each criteria, assign the score to each criteria. Please refer to the Score
Standard section for the detailed score standard.
6. Output the rubrics: You must output a valid JSON string of all the rubrics. Do not output anything else except the JSON
rubrics.
# Format:
You should output the rubrics in the following JSON format. Remember to add “‘json and “‘ at the beginning and end of
the JSON:
“‘json
[
{
"criteria": "...",
"score": "..."
}
]
“‘
DO NOT output anything else except the JSON rubrics.
Your output:
Figure 3: The basic prompt template for rubric generation in the Direct Prompting setting.
12

You are a serious examiner of experiment reproduction. Now you are given a paper. You task is to read the entire paper and
then give a set of rubrics to determine whether the paper is reproduced correctly. Please make sure you read and understand
these instructions carefully.
# Paper: {paper_content}
# Instructions:
1. Please read the paper carefully and then give a set of rubrics to determine whether the paper is reproduced correctly.
2. You must focus on the core contents about methodology and experiment settings of the paper, and the criteria in your
rubric should be very critical and specific.
3. The rubrics should be as comprehensive as possible, making sure it can reflect all the implementation details of the paper.
4. Your final target is to evaluate the reproduction of a codebase according to the paper. Thus, your rubrics should be able
to be validated with the codebase.
5. Each rubric should contain a single criteria and a score ranged from 1 to 5 according to its importance in the reproduction.
6. Do not output anything else except the JSON rubrics.
# Score Standard:
The score you assign to each criteria should be based on the following standard:
1 Not Important: This criteria only reflects a very minor detail of the paper, or is not closely related to the code implementation.
The reproduction will still be executable even if this criteria is not met. (e.g. mentioning some specific hyperparameters in plans)
2 Less Important: This criteria is generally less important in terms of implementation, but the reproduction will be significantly
affected if this criteria is not met, especially in the early stages of the reproduction. (e.g. reading the whole paper and
understanding the overall methodology)
3 Important: This criteria is important during the reproduction, greatly influence the whole reproduction process and the
final result. The final outcome will be significantly affected if this criteria is not met. (e.g. planning the repository architecture
or each of the experiment settings in detail)
4 Very Important: This criteria describes a key step, component, or function in the reproduction according to the paper. It
is an essential part of the implementation, the repository would not be executable if this criteria is not met. (e.g. coding
part of a component or a useful cuntion, implementing a specific experiment setting, etc.)
5 Critical: This criteria is one of the most important standard to measure whether a reproduction is successful. The reproduction
will not be considered complete if this requirement is not met or there are missing points for this criteria. (e.g. coding the key
method from the paper or a critical component for the whole reproduction to be executable, running the main experiments, etc.)
# Rubrics Design Steps:
1. Read the full paper: You need to first read the full paper carefully and understand the overall methodology and experiment
settings. Do not miss even a single detail, and make sure you have a clear understanding of how the paper is implemented.
2. Analyse the related sections: Based on your understanding of the paper, analyse the related sections that are closely related
to the reproduction. For example, the methodology section, the experiment settings section, the results section, the discussion
section, etc.
3. Extract key process: For each experiment mentioned in the paper, extract the key components, algorithm, or function
that is essential for the reproduction. They must be constructed in the codebase, and multiple rubrics may be introduced
to examine each step of the implementation of these key processes.
4. Articulate the criteria: You will be required to articulate the criteria for all detailed steps of the reproduction. Please make
sure your rubrics cover all stages and details of the reproduction, and each criteria should be specific and clear, which is
able to evaluate the reproduction with the codebase.
5. Assign the score: Based on the importance of each criteria, assign the score to each criteria. Please refer to the Score
Standard section for the detailed score standard.
6. Output the rubrics: You must output a valid JSON string of all the rubrics. Do not output anything else except the JSON
rubrics.
# Format:
Here is a sample rubrics file, examples.json, is provided as reference from another paper. Read through the examples carefully
to understand how they are structured and designed. You should strictly follow the format defined in examples.json.
# Examples {examples}
Remember to add “‘json and “‘ at the beginning and end of the JSON. DO NOT output anything else except the JSON rubrics.
Your output:
Figure 4: The prompt template with examples in the In-Context Examples setting.
13

You are a serious examiner of experiment reproduction. Now you are given a paper. You task is to read the entire paper and
then give a set of rubrics to determine whether the paper is reproduced correctly. Please make sure you read and understand
these instructions carefully.
Your working directory is {working_directory}. The paper is under the working directory and named {file_name}. You
should read the paper carefully and understand its content comprehensively.
# Instructions:
1. Please read the paper carefully and then give a set of rubrics to determine whether the paper is reproduced correctly.
2. You must focus on the core contents about methodology and experiment settings of the paper, and the criteria in your
rubric should be very critical and specific. This means that not all sections from the papers should be designed with rubrics.
Only the rubrics related to important sections such as preliminary experiments, methodology, experiment setup, and results
should be designed.
3. The rubrics should be as comprehensive as possible, making sure it can reflect all the implementation details of the paper.
4. Your final target is to evaluate the reproduction of a codebase according to the paper. Thus, your rubrics should be able
to be validated with the codebase.
5. Each rubric should contain a single criteria and a score ranged from 1 to 5 according to its importance in the reproduction.
6. Do not output anything else except the JSON rubrics.
# Score Standard:
The score you assign to each criteria should be based on the following standard:
1 Not Important: This criteria only reflects a very minor detail of the paper, or is not closely related to the code implementation.
The reproduction will still be executable even if this criteria is not met. (e.g. mentioning some specific hyperparameters in plans)
2 Less Important: This criteria is generally less important in terms of implementation, but the reproduction will be significantly
affected if this criteria is not met, especially in the early stages of the reproduction. (e.g. reading the whole paper and
understanding the overall methodology)
3 Important: This criteria is important during the reproduction, greatly influence the whole reproduction process and the
final result. The final outcome will be significantly affected if this criteria is not met. (e.g. planning the repository architecture
or each of the experiment settings in detail)
4 Very Important: This criteria describes a key step, component, or function in the reproduction according to the paper. It
is an essential part of the implementation, the repository would not be executable if this criteria is not met. (e.g. coding
part of a component or a useful cuntion, implementing a specific experiment setting, etc.)
5 Critical: This criteria is one of the most important standard to measure whether a reproduction is successful. The reproduction
will not be considered complete if this requirement is not met or there are missing points for this criteria. (e.g. coding the key
method from the paper or a critical component for the whole reproduction to be executable, running the main experiments, etc.)
# Rubrics Design Steps:
1. Read the full paper: You need to first read the full paper carefully and understand the overall methodology and experiment
settings. Do not miss even a single detail, and make sure you have a clear understanding of how the paper is implemented.
2. Analyse the related sections: Based on your understanding of the paper, analyse the related sections that are closely related
to the reproduction. For example, the methodology section, the experiment settings section, the results section, the discussion
section, etc.
3. Extract key process: For each experiment mentioned in the paper, extract the key components, algorithm, or function
that is essential for the reproduction. They must be constructed in the codebase, and multiple rubrics may be introduced
to examine each step of the implementation of these key processes.
4. Articulate the criteria: You will be required to articulate the criteria for all detailed steps of the reproduction. Please make
sure your rubrics cover all stages and details of the reproduction, and each criteria should be specific and clear, which is
able to evaluate the reproduction with the codebase.
5. Assign the score: Based on the importance of each criteria, assign the score to each criteria. Please refer to the Score
Standard section for the detailed score standard.
6. Output the rubrics: You must output a valid JSON string of all the rubrics. Do not output anything else except the JSON
rubrics.
# Examples
A sample rubrics file, examples.json, is provided as reference from another paper. Read through the examples carefully
to understand how they are structured and designed. Once you have a clear understanding, generate the rubrics for the current
paper ({file_name}), strictly following the format defined in examples.json.
Output the result to {output_path}.
Figure 5: The initial prompt for agents.
14

B Score Distribution
(a) Direct Prompting (b) In-Context Examples
(c) Agent Scaffold (d) Distilled Skill
Figure 6: Rubric score distributions across four generation settings for Claude-Sonnet. The distributions become
increasingly bell-shaped as the augmentation level increases.
15

C Paper Categoristion
Paper Title
A. Language Model Adaptation and Alignment
APT: Adaptive Pruning and Tuning Pretrained Language Models for Efficient Training and Inference
A Mechanistic Understanding of Alignment Algorithms: A Case Study on DPO and Toxicity
BBox-Adapter: Lightweight Adapting for Black-Box Large Language Models
Stay on Topic with Classifier-Free Guidance
What Will My Model Forget? Forecasting Forgotten Examples in Language Model Refinement
B. Vision and Vision-Language Models
Bridging Data Gaps in Diffusion Models with Adversarial Noise-Based Transfer Learning
LCA-on-the-Line: Benchmarking Out-of-Distribution Generalization with Class Taxonomies
Robust CLIP: Unsupervised Adversarial Fine-Tuning of Vision Embeddings for Robust Large Vision-Language Models
Sample-specific Masks for Visual Reprogramming-based Prompting
Test-Time Model Adaptation with Only Forward Passes
C. Reinforcement Learning
Fine-tuning Reinforcement Learning Models is Secretly a Forgetting Mitigation Problem
RICE: Breaking Through the Training Bottlenecks of Reinforcement Learning with Explanation
SAPG: Split and Aggregate Policy Gradients
Unsupervised Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning via Functional Reward Encodings
D. Probabilistic and Mathematical ML
All-in-one Simulation-Based Inference
Batch and Match: Black-Box Variational Inference with a Score-Based Divergence
Challenges in Training PINNs: A Loss Landscape Perspective
Refined Coreset Selection: Towards Minimal Coreset Size under Model Performance Constraints
Sequential Neural Score Estimation: Likelihood-Free Inference with Conditional Score Based Diffusion Models
Stochastic Interpolants with Data-Dependent Couplings
Table 4: Paper categorisation for PaperBench
16

D Threshold Discussion
We report the main intrinsic evaluation results with
the matching threshold set to τ = 0.7 in Table 2.
To assess sensitivity to this choice, we also provide
results for τ = 0.65 and τ = 0.75. Across these
threshold values, our key finding remains consistent:
stronger generation settings primarily improve recall,
while precision fluctuates across settings.
Method Backbone Model 
Cosine Similarity
Precision Recall F1
Human Annotation - 0.62 0.42 0.49
Direct Prompting
Claude-Sonnet
0.57 0.31 0.38
+In-Context Examples 0.53 0.36 0.41
+Agentic Scaffold 0.47 0.36 0.39
+Distilled Skill 0.54 0.41 0.44
Direct Prompting
GPT-5.4
0.41 0.24 0.28
+In-Context Examples 0.42 0.29 0.33
+Agentic Scaffold 0.49 0.32 0.37
+Distilled Skill 0.43 0.35 0.37
Table 5: Intrinsic meta-evaluation results with τ =0.75
Method Backbone Model 
Cosine Similarity
Precision Recall F1
Human Annotation - 0.91 0.85 0.88
Direct Prompting
Claude-Sonnet
0.90 0.78 0.83
+In-Context Examples 0.88 0.80 0.83
+Agentic Scaffold 0.87 0.83 0.84
+Distilled Skill 0.88 0.86 0.87
Direct Prompting
GPT-5.4
0.87 0.77 0.81
+In-Context Examples 0.87 0.78 0.82
+Agentic Scaffold 0.88 0.79 0.82
+Distilled Skill 0.84 0.81 0.83
Table 6: Intrinsic meta-evaluation results with τ =0.65
17
