
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2608.21690

Technical Report.
Context as an Environment:
Programmatic Context Management for Long-Horizon Agents
Yin Lin
†
yin.lin@alibaba-inc.com
Alibaba Group
Elaine Ang
† §
ra3448@columbia.edu
Columbia University
Erkang Zhu
erkang.zhu@alibaba-inc.com
Alibaba Group
Bolin Ding
bolin.ding@alibaba-inc.com
Alibaba Group
Jingren Zhou
jingren.zhou@alibaba-inc.com
Alibaba Group
ABSTRACT
LLM agents increasingly take on long-running tasks whose history grows far beyond a single
model context window. Existing approaches compress earlier interactions or extract selected
information into fixed memory representations, committing to what to preserve before future
needs are known. We present Scroll, a context manager that treats each agent session as an ex-
ecutable Session Environment. The environment is backed by an append-only Event Log and
a sandboxed, persistent Python kernel. The kernel maintains a typed namespace across model
calls, allowing tool outputs, retrieved history, and derived state to be bound to variables rather
than serialized into the prompt at each call. Model-written code searches, materializes, and
transforms session state through exec; only explicitly printed projections enter the model’s
working view for the next call. Context management thus becomes a programming task that
inherits the improving coding abilities of LLMs, while the Event Log preserves lossless his-
torical ground truth. As the working view approaches its budget, stale spans are evicted but
remain recoverable: an eviction index keeps compact landmarks tied to exact Event Log ad-
dresses, so that the agent navigates directly to evicted regions instead of searching the full
log. With Qwen3.8-Max as the backbone, Scroll achieves 94.8% on LongMemEval
S 
; 73.1%
on BEAM
10M 
, surpassing the best published memory system by 5.1 points; and 86.7% on
LOCA
256K 
, exceeding the best published long-horizon agent by 37.4 points.
1 Introduction
LLM agents are increasingly used for long-running tasks such as repository-level software engineering
[Jimenez et al., 2024, Yang et al., 2024] and deep research over the open web [Zheng et al., 2025, Wei
et al., 2025]. Unlike single-turn generation, these tasks unfold over extended trajectories of model calls,
tool executions, observations, failures, and revisions. As trajectories grow, a central challenge for the agent
harness is context management: session history accumulates continuously, while each model invocation
operates over a bounded context window. Moreover, the effective context a model can reliably exploit is far
smaller than its nominal window, as long-input retrieval and reasoning degrade with input length [Modarressi
et al., 2025, Zeng et al., 2026].
†
Equal contribution.
§
Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
1
arXiv:2608.21690v1 [cs.AI] 21 Aug 2026

Technical Report.
Current systems largely address this problem through context compression or external memory. Com-
pression is the dominant approach in practice: existing methods truncate stale spans, discard tool outputs,
or replace earlier trajectory segments with summaries [Kang et al., 2025, Ye et al., 2025], and production
agents such as Claude Code, Codex CLI, and Cursor reportedly employ similar compaction mechanisms as
the context window approaches its limit. External memory systems extract selected facts or episodes into a
separate store and later retrieve them through semantic or structured interfaces [Packer et al., 2023, Wu et al.,
2025, Cao et al., 2026]. Both are fundamentally lossy in the same way: the agent sees history only through
the summary or the memory store, so any detail they fail to keep is out of reach—even if the raw log still
exists on disk. Long-horizon tasks, however, may require exact historical evidence or nontrivial computation
over past events, such as comparing tool outputs produced far apart in the trajectory. Neither the relevant
information nor the required operation is known in advance, so no summary produced at observation time
can be guaranteed to preserve what is later needed.
We present Scroll, which keeps the agent’s history outside the model context [Zhang et al., 2025] and
represents it as an executable Session Environment. An append-only Event Log preserves the interaction
trajectory with stable addresses and provenance, while a sandboxed, persistent Python kernel survives across
model calls and maintains a typed namespace of resident variables. Any of this state can therefore be
materialized as Python objects and reused across reasoning steps without being serialized into the prompt.
This turns context management into writing programs—something current models are already highly
proficient at. The model issues exec actions to search and expand the Event Log, access permitted re-
sources, invoke tools [Anthropic, 2025b], and compute over resident variables. Retrieved records, tool out-
puts, and intermediate computations remain in the kernel unless explicitly emitted through print, which
the harness inserts as an observation into the next model context. Thus, exec determines how the environ-
ment is accessed and transformed, while print determines which projection enters the model’s working
view over the Session Environment.
As the working view approaches its budget, the harness evicts stale spans. Unlike compaction, eviction
changes only the view, never the underlying record: evicted events remain verbatim in the Event Log under
their stable addresses, where the model’s programs can search for and materialize them on demand. Scroll
additionally keeps an eviction index in the view: a compact map of what has left it. Where search recovers
only what the agent thinks to ask for, the index keeps the agent aware of history it can no longer see; each
entry anchors the exact addresses of the evicted events, from which the originals are materialized on demand.
Our contributions are threefold:
• We formulate long-horizon context management as choosing, at each step, a working view over a per-
sistent Session Environment. Existing approaches fix this choice before future needs are known; Scroll
defers it to query time as a program the model writes.
• We implement an executable context substrate combining an append-only Event Log, durable storage,
and a sandboxed persistent Python kernel. The model operates on the environment through exec; within
it, only explicit print output crosses into the model-visible context.
• We introduce an algorithm that keeps the working view within budget without losing history: evicted
spans remain intact in the Event Log, indexed by compact address-anchored entries the agent can navi-
gate directly.
2 Scroll Context Manager
We introduce Scroll, a context manager for long-horizon LLM agents. The key insight is that an agent’s
accumulated history should not be serialized into the model’s prompt but should instead be treated as an
environment that the model programmatically interacts with. The prompt then carries only a working view,
2

Technical Report.
Traditional context management
manage the serialized text inside the prompt
Historical sessions
⟦
s-12
⟧ 
prefers economy
⟦
s-31
⟧ 
avoid toll roads
Current session
U = user · A = agent
U 
Plan my Tokyo trip.
A 
search_flights
→ hundreds of fares
A 
search_routes
→ airport drive options
⋮
U
Book a flight I’d like and
plan my drive.
extract
memory store
retrieve
truncate /
summarize
model context
retrieved memory
session summary
⋮
Scroll: context management as code
the model writes code to construct its working view
model
Session Environment persistent · outside the prompt
Event Log append-only
▸ 
earlier sessions
seq 0087 U prefers economy
seq 0912 U avoid toll roads
▸ 
current session
seq 1103 A search_flights
seq 1893 U book one I’d like
Python kernel namespace persists
preference: dict ← s-12, s-31
flights: DataFrame ← seq 1103
print
model context
working view
current observation — print
economy fare 
✓
no-toll route 
✓
next model call
Durable storage
flights.json
routes.json
SQLite · FTS5
Payload storage
History.db 
Eviction Index evicted turns
Tier 2 
seq 1000–1400 ⟦flights⟧
Tier 1 
seq 1487 ⟦routes: done ·
next: book · routes.json⟧
↑ older = coarser
recover: ms.expand(seq_lo, seq_hi)
⋮
retrieve · compute
exec model-written code
1
2
3
4
5
persist
load
on evict
routes: DataFrame ← seq 1487
Flight results 
✓
Route results 
✓
earlier sessions
current session
tools
tool calls · results bind
Figure 1: Overview of Scroll. Scroll keeps the full session in a persistent, executable Session Environment;
model-written code retrieves and computes over it via exec, and print selects the working view exposed
to the next model call.
while the session lives outside the context window without loss. We first formalize the problem this de-
sign addresses (§2.1), then describe the Session Environment (§2.2), the programmatic interface through
which the model constructs its own context (§2.3), and the eviction mechanism that keeps the working view
bounded while preserving recoverability (§2.4).
2.1 Problem Formulation
Session state and working view. An agent session produces a growing sequence of events e
1
, e
2
, . . . (user
messages, model responses, tool calls, tool results), each with an associated payload (its raw content, e.g., a
full tool output). We write the session state after t agent steps as
S
t 
= (L
t
, P
t
, V
t
), (1)
where L
t 
is the event sequence with per-event metadata, P
t 
the payloads referenced by L
t
, and V
t 
auxiliary
derived state (in Scroll, a variable namespace; in other systems, a memory store or summary buffer). Each
model call, however, consumes a working view c
t 
with |c
t
| ≤ C tokens, where C is the model’s nominal
context window. The context-management problem is to choose, at every step, the next view: the map
S
t 
7
 
→ c
t+1
.
When the selection is made. Existing approaches fix the map S
t 
7
 
→ c
t+1 
before future needs are known:
compression applies a lossy operator ϕ as the trajectory grows, c
t+1 
= ϕ(c
t
, e
t
), deciding which infor-
mation survives when each segment is compacted; external memory applies an extraction operator ψ at
ingestion, V
t 
= ψ(V
t−1
, e
t
), fixing what is stored and how it can later be retrieved. Either way, the reduced
representation replaces the history it summarizes, so anything it omits is unrecoverable.
Scroll instead defers selection to query time. The full state S
t 
persists losslessly outside the context,
and the map S
t 
7
 
→ c
t+1 
is a program π
t 
the model writes at step t: the program executes on S
t
, updates V
t
,
and emits a bounded observation for the next call. The model decides what to recall, compute, and expose;
the harness makes those decisions safe via durable storage, stable addressing, and sandboxed execution.
3

Technical Report.
Operation Interface Role
LOCATE ms.search(query, k, ...) Find candidate Event Log records via BM25-ranked full-
text search and structured scope, kind, and time filters;
each hit carries its stable seq address.
MATERIALIZE ms.expand(seq)
ms.expand(seq lo,
 seq hi)
Recover exact turns or sequence spans, and load exter-
nalized payload contents behind lazy handles.
COMPUTE Ordinary Python and permitted database,
filesystem, and tool interfaces
Filter, join, aggregate, resolve updates, inspect artifacts,
or construct derived state.
EXPOSE print(value) Return the selected projection as a bounded observation;
everything else stays in the kernel.
Table 1: The model-facing interface factorizes context construction into location, materialization, computa-
tion, and exposure.
Because the policy is expressed as code, it inherits the full generality of programs and improves with the
backbone’s coding ability, at no change to the harness.
2.2 Persistent Session Environment
Scroll realizes S
t 
as a Session Environment (Figure 1, right), with three components corresponding to L
t
,
P
t
, and V
t
.
Append-only Event Log (L
t
). The Event Log is the durable, ground-truth record of an agent’s sessions: a
single append-only log that spans session boundaries. Every interaction appends a typed event carrying the
metadata future queries need—role, session and agent identifiers, timestamps, and tool state—and receives
its immutable, monotonically increasing seq. Our implementation stores events in SQLite. Search defaults
to BM25 rather than embeddings: it is deterministic and requires no index-time model calls.
Durable storage (P
t
). A payload is the raw content an interaction produced, such as a full tool result or
a generated artifact. The log records that the interaction occurred but need not store every byte of it in the
event row: small payloads remain inline in SQLite, while large ones are moved into JSON or artifact storage
on the filesystem, with the row retaining a bounded preview and a recovery pointer. Externalized payloads
are accessed through lazy handles (ToolResultRef, ArtifactRef).
Persistent runtime and resident namespace (V
t
). A sandboxed Python kernel persists across model calls
throughout the session; its namespace holds environment objects: resident Python values and lazy handles,
each carrying type, size, and provenance metadata identifying the events it derives from. Tool invocations
issued through the programmatic tool interface [Anthropic, 2025b] return Python objects that later programs
can operate on. The harness prepends to every call a namespace digest: a short listing of each resident
variable’s name, type, and shape, with small scalar values shown inline. Model-authored code runs in a
fail-closed sandbox: the Event Log is read-only from the kernel, and database, filesystem, network, and tool
access are limited to capabilities the harness explicitly declares.
2.3 Programmatic Context Construction
Scroll uses a CodeAct-style interface [Wang et al., 2024] for both task execution and context construction.
A controlled capability object, ms, forms the model-facing memory surface over durable history, abstracting
the physical backend behind four operations (Table 1).
4

Technical Report.
Model context working view 
fixed prefix: system prompt + tool defs
3 rows 20 previews 2 events + 2 rows
1 
exec call tools
flights = search_flights()
routes = search_routes()
print(flights.head(3))
both bind in the kernel · only 3 rows print
2 
exec locate history
previews = ms.search(
"prefer OR avoid", k=20)
print(previews)
previews + seq enter the working view,
revealing economy · no tolls
3 
exec materialize · compose
prefs = ms.expand(87, 912)
fl = flights[flights.cabin=="economy"]
rt = routes[routes.tolls==0]
print(prefs, fl.nsmallest(1,"price"),
rt.nsmallest(1,"mins"))
the frames stay resident · verified prefs + the cheapest
flight & fastest route enter the working view
Python kernel resident namespace
flights routes previews prefs fl rt
resident across turns
append call + full result ms.search ms.expand(87, 912)
Event Log append-only · ground truth
seq 0087 prefer economy · seq 0912 avoid tolls · seq 1103 search_flights ▸ 142 rows · seq 1487 search_routes ▸ 38 rows
Figure 2: Programmatic context construction. Three exec turns compute over resident state in the kernel;
only print output crosses into the next model context/working view.
Algorithm 1 Recoverable context eviction
Input: working view c, Event Log L, eviction index I, budget ρC, tier width k
Output: bounded c and updated I; removed spans stay recoverable from L
1: if |c| > ρC then
2: L ← PERSIST(c, L) ▷ live turns become durable
3: R ← PROTECTED(c) ▷ active turn, recent tail, newest tool results
4: c ← R ∪ FOLDPAYLOADS(c \ R) ▷ payloads → seq pointers
5: E ← SELECTSPAN(c \ R, |c| − ρC) ▷ oldest completed span above budget
6: c, I ← EVICTTOINDEX(c, E, H[E]) ▷ E leaves the view; its headlines enter I, shown in place
7: I ← ROLLUP(I, k)
8: end if
9: return (c, I)
Figure 2 traces the trip-planning task of Figure 1 through three exec cells. Cell 1 binds full tool results
to the resident variables flights and routes in the Python kernel, printing only a few rows. Cell 2
searches the Event Log for stated preferences; the matching previews and seq addresses enter the working
view, revealing the user’s preference for economy cabins and toll-free routes. Cell 3 expands the two events
for the verbatim record, filters and ranks the resident variables accordingly, and prints the two preference
turns alongside the cheapest economy flight and the fastest toll-free route. The bulk tool results never enter
the working view; every call is appended to the Event Log with its full result, addressable by seq.
2.4 Eviction and Off-Context Navigation
The working view must stay bounded as the session grows. Scroll bounds it with an eviction procedure
(Algorithm 1) that triggers whenever the working view exceeds a budget ρC. The procedure first persists
any live turns to the Event Log and protects the active turn, the recent tail, and the newest tool results. The
remainder is evicted in increasing order of recovery cost: completed tool payloads are folded first, since a
single seq pointer suffices to recover them; whole spans are removed only if the view remains over budget.
What leaves the view is not lost: it stays verbatim in the Event Log, and the procedure’s one invariant is that
everything it removes stays addressable.
5

Technical Report.
Headlines as navigation anchors. Lexical search recovers an evicted span only when the agent recalls its
wording; Scroll therefore also maintains landmarks for position-based navigation. As part of each response,
the model writes a short headline—task, verified state, next action, and a status—which Scroll binds at
append time to the seq assigned by the Event Log, yielding a map H from address to headline. When
a span is evicted, its headlines enter a tiered index (Figure 1). A flat index would grow linearly with the
session, so Scroll rolls it up: each tier holds at most k blocks; when a tier fills, the newest block retains full
detail while the k − 1 older ones collapse to one line each and merge into the next tier. After n evictions,
the index occupies O(k log
k 
n) blocks, providing fine anchors for recent history, coarse ranges for distant
history, each backed by a seq span.
3 Experimental Setup
3.1 Benchmarks
We evaluate Scroll in two long-horizon settings: (1) retrieving and reasoning over interaction histories that
exceed the live context, and (2) reasoning and acting in an agentic environment whose state grows over time.
Long-term memory retrieval and reasoning. LongMemEval [Wu et al., 2025] poses questions over a
history of prior user–assistant conversations. Answering may require locating evidence scattered across ses-
sions, resolving temporal dependencies and knowledge updates, and reasoning over the retrieved evidence.
The benchmark provides three settings with increasing amounts of distractor history: Oracle, where the
history contains only the evidence sessions; and S and M, where each question is paired with roughly 50 and
500 sessions (∼115K and ∼1.5M tokens) of history, respectively.
BEAM [Tavakoli et al., 2025] extends this evaluation to substantially longer coherent histories. Its ques-
tions may require collecting non-adjacent evidence, tracking changes over time, deduplicating repeated in-
formation, or aggregating facts distributed throughout the history. The benchmark spans four history scales
(128K, 500K, 1M, and 10M tokens); at the largest scale, BEAM
10M 
, histories cannot be consumed directly
within current model context windows.
Long-context reasoning and acting. LOCA [Zeng et al., 2026] evaluates agents that must reason, invoke
tools, and modify an environment as the available environment state accumulates. LOCA measures whether
an agent can continue to reason and act throughout a growing tool-use trajectory. The benchmark scales the
environment description length (the token count of the full environment state as seen through tool outputs)
across seven regimes from 8K to 256K tokens; we evaluate on the two largest regimes (128K and 256K).
3.2 Agent Configuration
Our main experiments use Qwen3.8-Max as the agent backbone. All context management methods are im-
plemented and evaluated on top of QwenPaw [Agentscope Team, 2026], an agent operating system providing
tool invocation and execution infrastructure, and orchestrated with Harbor [Harbor Framework Team, 2026]
in the benchmark-provided environments. Our implementation to reproduce all reported results is available
at https://github.com/niceIrene/QwenPaw/tree/scroll-research.
Scroll exposes its functionality to the agent through a set of tools, of which the following two implement
the exec action of Section 2.
• repl exec
 executes a model-generated Python cell in the persistent kernel. Environment tools are
exposed as Python functions forwarded to the underlying services, enabling programmatic tool calling;
6

Technical Report.
all intermediate computation stays in the kernel, and only explicit, budgeted print output enters the
model’s working window.
• recall history python executes a cell with the memory surface ms bound: ms.search locates
evicted records and ms.expand materializes them as Python objects, which the model filters, com-
bines, or aggregates in the kernel before printing a distilled result.
We use a single system prompt and one set of context-management rules across all benchmarks, with
no few-shot demonstrations. Each memory benchmark contributes only a short rubric specifying its data
layout, memory-surface usage, evidence-selection conventions, and answer format (see detailed prompts
in Appendix C). For LOCA, we use the benchmark’s official task instructions unmodified, adding only
environment metadata (available APIs and workspace paths).
To test generality across backbones, we additionally evaluate Qwen3.7-Max, Deepseek-v4-pro, GLM-
5.2, Kimi-K2.7, and Qwen3.6-35B-A3B (an open-weight model with a smaller active-parameter footprint),
changing only the foundation model.
3.3 Evaluation Protocol
For the two memory benchmarks, we ingest each conversation history into Scroll session by session, in
chronological order. At each session boundary, the raw context is cleared, and only Scroll’s internal state
(the eviction index and the Event Log) is carried forward to subsequent sessions. For LOCA, each task starts
from the benchmark-provided initial environment state. The agent explores and acts on the environment
directly, with Scroll managing its context as the trajectory grows.
LongMemEval and BEAM are scored with their benchmark-provided LLM-as-a-judge prompts, using
Qwen3.6-flash at temperature 0 as the judge; we report accuracy for LongMemEval and the judge score for
BEAM. LOCA is scored with its native rule-based verifier, which checks the final environment state, and we
report accuracy. Unless otherwise noted, each task is evaluated once in the benchmark-provided container
with a random seed; we also record model-facing input and output tokens and the number of interaction
turns for each task.
4 Results
4.1 Comparison with Existing Systems
Retrieval accuracy comparison with long-term memory systems (Table 2). Agents do not natively re-
tain information across sessions, so answering questions over prior interactions requires an external memory
system. We compare Scroll against dedicated long-term memory systems. For each system, we report the
best publicly available result under its own preferred configuration (backbone model, retrieval budget, and
judge) as of August 15, 2026.
1 
Appendix A provides per-category breakdowns of Scroll on the S and M
splits of LongMemEval and on BEAM
10M 
.
As shown in Table 2, Scroll is competitive with the strongest reported systems on LongMemEval
S 
and
beats the best-performing system by 5.1 points on BEAM
10M 
. Existing memory systems follow a three-
stage paradigm: at ingestion, an LLM processes the history into a derived store through fact extraction,
summarization, or knowledge-graph construction; at query time, a retrieval pipeline selects candidate mem-
ories from that store; and a reader model then reasons over the returned snippets to produce the answer.
Scroll instead ingests the raw history as-is, composes retrieval code per question, and needs no separate
reader: the agent that writes and executes the queries also produces the final answer directly.
1
We do not reproduce the baselines ourselves, as independent reproductions in this area have repeatedly led to disagreement
over evaluation setup [Zep, 2025, Mem0, 2025].
7

Technical Report.
Table 2: Comparison with existing long-term memory systems. For each baseline, we report the best pub-
licly available result under that system’s own setup as of August 15, 2026; “–” denotes no publicly reported
result. These are reference points from the literature rather than a controlled comparison: reader models
differ across rows and can substantially affect scores—EmergenceMem (GPT-4o), Zep (GPT-5.4), Mastra
OM (GPT-5 mini), Mem0 (GPT-5), Hindsight (Gemini 3 Pro), Exabase M-1 (Gemini 3 Flash), RAG and
LIGHT (Llama-4-Maverick); Honcho uses a multi-model pipeline and Cognee does not report its reader.
Method LongMemEval
S 
BEAM
10M
RAG [Tavakoli et al., 2025] – 24.9
LIGHT [Tavakoli et al., 2025] – 26.6
Zep [Zep, 2026] 90.2 –
Mem0 [Chhikara et al., 2025, Mem0, 2026] 94.4 48.6
Hindsight [Bartholomew, 2026] 94.6 64.1
EmergenceMem [Emergence AI, 2026] 86.0 –
Honcho [Plastic Labs, 2026] 90.4 40.6
Mastra OM [Barnes, 2026] 94.9 –
Cognee [Markovi´c, 2026] – 67.0
Exabase M-1 [Exabase, 2026] 96.4 68.0
Scroll (ours) 94.8 73.1
Table 3: LOCA accuracy (%) of different context-management strategies at the two largest environment
description lengths. All agent loops use Qwen3.8-Max as the backbone; ∆ denotes the absolute drop from
128K to 256K.
Agent loop 128K 256K ∆
Summarization Agent 86.7 65.3 -21.4
Retrieval Agent 88.0 66.7 -21.3
CodeAct Agent 89.3 85.3 -4.0
Scroll (ours) 89.3 86.7 -2.6
Comparison of context-management strategies on LOCA (Table 3). On LOCA, we compare four
agents that share the same backbone (Qwen3.8-Max) and toolset, and differ only in how they manage a
growing context: (i) a summarization agent, a ReAct agent [Yao et al., 2023] that periodically compacts its
interaction history into a summary; (ii) a retrieval agent, a ReAct agent whose overflowing history is evicted
and made accessible through a recall tool; (iii) a CodeAct agent [Wang et al., 2024] that interacts with the
environment through programmatic tool calling; and (iv) Scroll. A comparison against the best published
numbers from the LOCA paper [Zeng et al., 2026] and its leaderboard is in Appendix B.
Table 3 reports accuracy at the two largest environment description lengths. The CodeAct agent and
the agent with Scroll, which bind intermediate results to environment objects instead of carrying raw text in
context, achieve the best performance and the smallest decrease as context grows.
4.2 Can Different Backbone Models Use Scroll Effectively?
Scroll provides an environment for managing context but does not dictate its use: what state to keep where,
and what code to write, are left to the model. A natural question is whether the ability to use Scroll effectively
is specific to one backbone or shared across models of varying capability. We rerun both regimes across six
backbones with the harness, tools, prompts, and context-management rules held fixed (Table 4).
Every backbone can use Scroll, but stronger models benefit more. On LongMemEval
S 
, where the model
8

Technical Report.
Table 4: Scroll across backbones. Only the foundation model changes; harness, tools, prompts, and context-
management rules are identical.
Backbone LongMemEval
S 
BEAM
10M 
LOCA 128K LOCA 256K
Qwen3.8-Max 94.8 73.1 89.3 86.7
Qwen3.7-Max 92.8 66.6 78.7 60.0
Deepseek-v4-pro 93.2 70.2 69.3 58.7
GLM-5.2 93.6 70.7 66.7 62.7
Kimi-K2.7 92.0 67.2 30.7 32.0
Qwen3.6-35B-A3B 88.8 58.1 37.3 22.7
Info extr.
Multi-sess.
Event ord.
Temporal
Knowl. upd.
Contra. res.
Summar.
Pref. foll.
Instr. foll.
Abstention
Overall
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
mean judge score
0.20
0.66
0.71
0.73
Lossy summarization Scroll w/o REPL Scroll w/o index Scroll
Figure 3: Ablating Scroll’s components on BEAM
10M 
(judge scores; hatched bars are Scroll variants;
Qwen3.8-Max, thinking on). Lossy summarization: summaries replace the originals at ingestion. Scroll
w/o REPL: ms exposed as ordinary tool calls, with no persistent kernel. Scroll w/o index: the eviction index
is removed, leaving keyword search only. Scroll: the full system.
queries the history database with short programs, all backbones benefit similarly—even the 35B model
reaches 88.8, within six points of the best (94.8). On BEAM
10M 
the gap stays within 15 points. On LOCA,
however, tasks demand longer trajectories and more complex program synthesis, so the spread widens to
64 points at 256K (86.7 vs. 22.7). Failures are not protocol-level: all backbones adhere to the CodeAct
interface, but weaker models commit more execution errors or terminate prematurely on aggregation-heavy
tasks. Scroll’s ceiling on such tasks thus rises with multi-step query planning and the ability to decide when
evidence suffices, suggesting room for post-training on frontier model traces.
4.3 Ablation Study
We ablate the core components of Scroll on BEAM
10M 
. Figure 3 reports judge scores per category and
overall. First, to assess the utility of the Event Log, we compare Scroll against a lossy variant whose history
is summarized at ingestion, with the originals discarded. Second, to evaluate the programmatic interface,
we compare against Scroll w/o REPL, which exposes search, expand, and sql query
 as ordinary tool
calls, with no persistent kernel. Third, to assess index-guided navigation, we remove the eviction index,
leaving the agent to locate history through keyword search alone rather than index ranges.
Discarding the original records is the most damaging ablation: the lossy variant falls to 19.9 overall,
with near-zero scores wherever the answer must preserve exact values from the history, such as information
extraction, temporal reasoning, and knowledge update. Scroll w/o REPL underperforms full Scroll by 7.3
points, since serialized tool results cannot be filtered, joined, or aggregated in the kernel; the difference is
concentrated in abilities that require composing evidence from many records, such as knowledge update
(92.5 vs. 82.5) and instruction following (97.5 vs. 76.3), while single-lookup abilities are unaffected. Re-
moving the eviction index costs 1.8 points overall, but the effect concentrates where evidence is scattered
across the history and must otherwise be collected by keyword search: preference following (89.1 vs. 74.9),
9

Technical Report.
LongMemEval-S
BEAM-10M
LOCA-128KLOCA-256K
10
4
10
5
Input tokens
37.1k
146.3k
20.8k 
20.5k
(a)
LongMemEval-S
BEAM-10M
LOCA-128KLOCA-256K
10
2
10
3
10
4
Output tokens
1729
5456
627.8 
598.3
(b)
LongMemEval-S
BEAM-10M
LOCA-128KLOCA-256K
0
50
100
Interaction turns
5.4 
9.1
35.8 
39.0
(c)
Mean Median
Figure 4: Per-task cost of Scroll (backbone: Qwen3.8-Max): (a) input tokens, (b) output tokens, (c) agent
turns. Boxes span the IQR with the median marked; red diamonds are means. Log scale in (a) and (b).
summarization (70.5 vs. 62.6), and event ordering (64.1 vs. 58.1).
4.4 Cost and Efficiency
Scroll exposes only a small fraction of the corpus to the model. Ingestion involves no additional LLM calls,
and at query time records are filtered inside the Python kernel, so only printed output enters the context.
Figure 4 shows the per-task distribution of input tokens, output tokens, and agent turns: median input on
BEAM
10M 
is 105K tokens, about 1% of the corpus, and output is an order of magnitude smaller than input
across all three benchmarks. Note that for LongMemEval
S 
and BEAM
10M 
we measure retrieval alone,
whereas for LOCA we measure full task completion, hence its longer trajectories. We report token counts
rather than latency or dollar cost, as both depend on serving configuration.
5 Related Work
Context compression and external memory. Most context-management systems either compress the
active trajectory or store selected information externally. Compression methods summarize, clear, or fold
earlier interactions into shorter representations [Kang et al., 2025, Ye et al., 2025, Zhou et al., 2026, Kontonis
et al., 2026]. External-memory systems instead extract facts, episodes, or notes into a separate store and
retrieve them when relevant [Packer et al., 2023, Tan et al., 2026, Letta, 2026]. Both approaches reduce
the history the model sees by deciding, before future needs are known, which information survives, in what
form, and through which interface it can later be reached. Scroll instead retains the original interaction
events and referenced payloads; summaries and indexes provide compact working views without becoming
the sole representation of historical evidence.
Code as the agent–environment interface. CodeAct introduced executable Python as a general action
interface for LLM agents [Wang et al., 2024], while programmatic tool-calling and code-execution systems
allow tool results to remain in sandbox variables and enter context only through selected projections [An-
thropic, 2025b,a]. Related work has also explored programmatic access to externalized long input prompts
[Zhang et al., 2025] and structured working state [Li, 2026, VISTA, 2026]. Scroll applies this principle
to the continuously evolving state of an agent session. Its persistent Python kernel retains typed variables
across model calls: exec retrieves and transforms session state, while only explicit print outputs cross
the observation boundary.
Lossless session history and navigation. Prior systems have explored verbatim recall storage, event-
sourced interaction logs, lossless pointers, and provenance-linked memory [Packer et al., 2023, Nakajima,
10

Technical Report.
2026, Ehrlich and Blackman, 2026, Zhang et al., 2026]. Scroll combines a queryable append-only Event
Log with external payload references and an executable resident namespace. Its within-session eviction
index is a navigation layer over this retained state: recent history is represented by fine-grained, sequence-
addressed headlines, while older history is represented by coarser ranges. Once a relevant region is located,
the original events and payloads are recovered programmatically. In the terminology of CoALA [Sumers
et al., 2024] and context-engineering surveys [Mei et al., 2025], Scroll connects executable working state
with verbatim episodic history through a persistent Session Environment.
6 Conclusion
In this report, we present Scroll, a context manager that makes context management an explicit model policy
over a persistent Session Environment: the model uses exec to retrieve and compute over externalized
state, and uses print to decide what enters the next context, while the harness provides deterministic
storage, execution, and recovery. This policy can in turn be distilled from frontier models into smaller ones.
Successful trajectories supervise two decisions: context retrieval (when and how to write retrieval code over
the agent history) and context injection (which computed results should be printed back into the working
window). We plan to use frontier-model traces for supervised fine-tuning or policy distillation, keeping the
underlying context mechanisms fixed.
References
Agentscope Team. QwenPaw. https://qwenpaw.agentscope.io/, 2026.
Anthropic. Code execution with MCP: Building more efficient agents. https://www.anthropic.
com/engineering/code-execution-with-mcp, 2025a.
Anthropic. Programmatic tool calling. https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/
agents-and-tools/tool-use/programmatic-tool-calling, 2025b.
Tyler Barnes. Observational memory: 95% on LongMemEval. https://mastra.ai/research/
observational-memory, February 2026.
Ben Bartholomew. Hindsight is #1 on BEAM — the benchmark that tests memory at 10M tokens. https:
//hindsight.vectorize.io/blog/2026/04/02/beam-sota, 2026.
Zouying Cao, Jiaji Deng, Li Yu, Weikang Zhou, Zhaoyang Liu, Bolin Ding, and Hai Zhao. Remember me,
refine me: A dynamic procedural memory framework for experience-driven agent evolution. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026, pages 16803–16822, 2026.
Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Building
production-ready AI agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413, 2025.
Clint Ehrlich and Theodore Blackman. LCM: Lossless context management. Voltropy PBC technical report,
2026.
Emergence AI. SOTA on LongMemEval with RAG. https://www.emergence.ai/blog/
sota-on-longmemeval-with-rag, 2026.
Exabase. Exabase reports state-of-the-art results on BEAM mem-
ory benchmark. https://www.hpcwire.com/aiwire/2026/07/28/
11

Technical Report.
exabase-reports-state-of-the-art-results-on-beam-memory-benchmark/,
July 2026.
Harbor Framework Team. Harbor: A framework for building and running agent evaluations at scale.
https://github.com/laude-institute/harbor, 2026.
Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R.
Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Minki Kang, Wei-Ning Chen, Dongge Han, Huseyin A Inan, Lukas Wutschitz, Yanzhi Chen, Robert Sim,
and Saravan Rajmohan. Acon: Optimizing context compression for long-horizon llm agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.00615, 2025.
Vasilis Kontonis, Yuchen Zeng, Shivam Garg, Lingjiao Chen, Hao Tang, Ziyan Wang, Ahmed Awadallah,
Eric Horvitz, John Langford, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Memento: Teaching llms to manage their own
context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.09852, 2026.
Letta. Context repositories: Version-controlled memory for agents. Letta Blog, 2026. https://www.
letta.com/blog/context-repositories/.
Bojie Li. User as code: Executable memory for personalized agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.16707,
2026.
Vasilije Markovi´c. cognee on BEAM: SOTA results without a benchmark-specific memory system. https:
//www.cognee.ai/blog/deep-dives/benchmarking-cognee-on-beam, 2026.
Lingrui Mei, Jiayu Yao, Yuyao Ge, Yiwei Wang, Baolong Bi, Yujun Cai, Jiazhi Liu, Mingyu Li, Zhong-Zhi
Li, Duzhen Zhang, Chenlin Zhou, Jiayi Mao, Tianze Xia, Jiafeng Guo, and Shenghua Liu. A survey
of context engineering for large language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.
13334.
Mem0. Revisiting Zep’s 84% LoCoMo claim: Corrected evaluation & 58.44% accuracy. https://
github.com/getzep/zep-papers/issues/5, 2025.
Mem0. Memory evaluation. https://docs.mem0.ai/core-concepts/memory-evaluation,
2026.
MiniMax. MiniMax M3: Frontier coding, 1M context, native multimodality — all in one model. https:
//www.minimax.io/blog/minimax-m3, 2026.
Ali Modarressi, Hanieh Deilamsalehy, Franck Dernoncourt, Trung Bui, Ryan A. Rossi, Seunghyun Yoon,
and Hinrich Sch¨utze. NoLiMa: Long-context evaluation beyond literal matching. In International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2025.
Yohei Nakajima. The log is the agent: Event-sourced reactive graphs for auditable, forkable agentic systems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.21997, 2026.
Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph E. Gonzalez.
MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
Plastic Labs. Honcho: Memory infrastructure for stateful agents. https://github.com/
plastic-labs/honcho, 2026.
12

Technical Report.
Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Cognitive architectures
for language agents. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR), 2024.
Juntao Tan, Liangwei Yang, Wenting Zhao, Jielin Qiu, Ming Zhu, Rithesh Murthy, Silvio Savarese, Huan
Wang, Shelby Heinecke, and Caiming Xiong. A lightweight, domain-adaptive memory system for LLM
agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2026.
Mohammad Tavakoli, Alireza Salemi, Carrie Ye, Mohamed Abdalla, Hamed Zamani, and J Ross Mitchell.
Beyond a million tokens: Benchmarking and enhancing long-term memory in LLMs. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.27246, 2025.
VISTA. LLM agents are latent context managers: Typed working memory and state proprioception. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2606.30005, 2026.
Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Executable
code actions elicit better llm agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01030.
Jason Wei, Zhiqing Sun, Spencer Papay, Scott McKinney, Jeffrey Han, Isa Fulford, Hyung Won Chung,
Alex Tachard Passos, William Fedus, and Amelia Glaese. Browsecomp: A simple yet challenging bench-
mark for browsing agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12516.
Di Wu, Hongwei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Yuwei Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Dong Yu. LongMemEval: Bench-
marking chat assistants on long-term interactive memory. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR), 2025.
John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir
Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. Re-
Act: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Rui Ye, Zhongwang Zhang, Kuan Li, Huifeng Yin, Zhengwei Tao, Yida Zhao, Liangcai Su, Liwen Zhang,
Zile Qiao, Xinyu Wang, et al. Agentfold: Long-horizon web agents with proactive context management.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24699, 2025.
Weihao Zeng, Yuzhen Huang, and Junxian He. Loca-bench: Benchmarking language agents under control-
lable and extreme context growth. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07962, 2026.
Zep. Lies, damn lies, and statistics: Is mem0 really SOTA in agent memory? https://blog.getzep.
com/lies-damn-lies-statistics-is-mem0-really-sota-in-agent-memory/,
2025.
Zep. Research: Zep benchmark results. https://www.getzep.com/research/, 2026.
Alex L. Zhang, Tim Kraska, and Omar Khattab. Recursive language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.24601, 2025.
Yuhan Zhang, Zhiyuan Guo, Ziheng Zeng, Wei Wang, Wentao Wu, and Lijie Xu. Mandol: An agglomerative
agent memory system for long-term conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.29778, 2026.
13

Technical Report.
Yuxiang Zheng, Dayuan Fu, Xiangkun Hu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyumanshan Ye, Pengrui Lu, and Pengfei Liu.
DeepResearcher: Scaling deep research via reinforcement learning in real-world environments. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.03160, 2025.
Zijian Zhou, Ao Qu, Zhaoxuan Wu, Sunghwan Kim, Alok Prakash, Daniela Rus, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low,
and Paul Pu Liang. MEM1: Learning to synergize memory and reasoning for efficient long-horizon
agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2026.
14

Technical Report.
A Detailed Breakdowns of Benchmark Results
A.1 Per-Question-Type Results on LongMemEval
Table 5 reports Scroll’s per-question-type accuracy on the S and M splits of LongMemEval under the pro-
tocol of Section 3.3. The degradation from S to M is concentrated in question types that require aggregat-
ing evidence across many sessions: multi-session accuracy drops from 88.0% to 81.2% and single-session
(preference) from 100.0% to 83.3%. With more irrelevant sessions, the agent-written code reliably locates
a single supporting session but often misses part of the evidence.
Table 5: Per-question-type accuracy (%) of Scroll on LongMemEval
S 
and LongMemEval
M 
(backbone:
Qwen3.8-Max). Question types follow the benchmark taxonomy [Wu et al., 2025].
Question type LongMemEval
S 
LongMemEval
M
Single-session (user) 98.6 100.0
Single-session (assistant) 100.0 100.0
Single-session (preference) 100.0 83.3
Multi-session 88.0 81.2
Temporal reasoning 94.0 93.6
Knowledge update 98.7 87.2
Overall 94.8 89.6
A.2 Per-Category Results on BEAM
Table 6 breaks BEAM
10M 
down by memory ability. We compare against Mem0, Hindsight, and Ex-
abase M-1, the baselines for which per-category BEAM
10M 
results are publicly available as of August 15,
2026 [Mem0, 2026, Bartholomew, 2026, Exabase, 2026]; Cognee and Honcho report only overall scores.
Mem0, as a representative of the ingestion-heavy, fixed-pipeline paradigm, makes the contrast with Scroll’s
query-time approach most visible at the category level.
Table 6: Per-category judge scores on BEAM
10M 
. Categories follow the benchmark’s ten memory abili-
ties [Tavakoli et al., 2025]. Scroll uses Qwen3.8-Max with thinking on; baseline breakdowns are taken from
their published evaluations and use different configurations, so cross-system comparison is indicative rather
than controlled.
Category Mem0 Hindsight Exabase M-1 Scroll (ours)
Information extraction 56.2 51.2 66.3 75.0
Multi-session reasoning 26.1 16.6 9.6 21.9
Event ordering 20.2 61.6 67.5 64.1
Temporal reasoning 16.3 41.3 58.8 47.5
Knowledge update 75.0 65.0 45.0 92.5
Contradiction resolution 32.5 56.9 58.8 88.1
Summarization 46.9 78.2 91.9 70.5
Preference following 90.4 97.5 95.0 89.1
Instruction following 82.5 92.5 97.5 97.5
Abstention 40.0 80.0 90.0 85.0
Overall 48.6 64.1 68.0 73.1
Scroll leads by the widest margins where the answer hinges on a few exact records that must be located
15

Technical Report.
in the raw history and then ordered or reconciled: knowledge update (92.5 vs. 45.0–75.0), contradiction
resolution (88.1 vs. 32.5–58.8), and information extraction (75.0 vs. 51.2–66.3). These categories punish
write-time compression: resolving an update or a contradiction needs both sides of the value timeline, in
order, with provenance, whereas retrieval over an ingested store typically surfaces the current state of a fact
without its ordered history. The degree varies by system (Mem0’s add-only extraction preserves old facts
and holds up on knowledge update at 75.0), but none matches recovering the evidence by address from the
verbatim Event Log.
Conversely, Scroll underperforms the strongest baselines where the graded artifact is itself a condensed
view over many records: summarization (70.5 vs. 91.9 for Exabase M-1), preference following (89.1 vs.
97.5 for Hindsight), and temporal reasoning (47.5 vs. 58.8 for Exabase M-1). Ingestion-heavy pipelines
build digests and preference profiles at write time, so the condensed view already exists when the question
arrives; Scroll must reconstruct it from raw events per query, and its residual failures there are errors of
query formulation rather than retrieval (Appendix D).
Multi-session reasoning remains the weakest category for every system (9.6–26.1); Scroll’s misses stem
from over-precise filters that undercount the evidence set rather than from unreachable records. This profile
is consistent across our repeated runs: contradiction resolution and knowledge update are among Scroll’s
strongest categories in every run, multi-session reasoning and summarization among its weakest.
B Additional LOCA Results
Comparison with published results. Table 7 places Scroll alongside the best publicly reported results
from the LOCA paper [Zeng et al., 2026] and its leaderboard. These systems use different backbone models,
so the comparison is system-level rather than controlled.
Table 7: System-level comparison on LOCA. Results for prior systems are taken from the LOCA pa-
per [Zeng et al., 2026] or its public leaderboard and use different backbone models; “–” denotes no publicly
reported result.
System 128K 256K
GPT-5.2-Medium + ReAct [Yao et al., 2023] 38.7 21.3
GPT-5.2-Medium + PTC [Anthropic, 2025b] 49.3 –
Claude-4.5-Opus + ReAct [Zeng et al., 2026] 34.0 14.7
MiniMax M3 + ReAct [MiniMax, 2026] – 49.3
Scroll (Qwen3.8-Max) 89.3 86.7
C Full Prompts and Rubrics
Beyond the shared system prompt and context-management rules of Section 3.2, each memory benchmark
contributes one rubric, reproduced below. For LOCA we use the benchmark’s official task instructions
unmodified, adding only environment metadata (available APIs and workspace paths).
BEAM rubric
The user's benchmark conversation history is stored in your durable history as rows
with kind='beam chat turn'.
 Rows are chronologically ordered by seq; each session
has a distinct session id; rows carry an ISO created at.
16

Technical Report.
Recall it with the recall history python tool: pass a Python cell that uses the
pre-bound ms surface. Search with concise keyword or synonym queries, e.g.
ms.search(QUERY, all agents=True,
 kind='beam chat turn', k=10). Uppercase OR passes
through as a boolean operator; otherwise terms are AND-combined. Start with k=5 or
k=10 and increase it only when the evidence is insufficient. If a question
combines multiple named systems, efforts, or entities, search each one separately
instead of putting every name into one AND query. Extract one directly relevant
value for each part, preserve its unit, and only then calculate. Each hit already
includes the full turn text together with its seq, session id,
 role, and metadata;
do not call ms.expand merely to pair a user message with its assistant reply. If
you must reread a returned turn, call ms.expand only with that hit's exact seq
neighbours (lo, hi). For a question about one source date or an inclusive date
range, filter on the created at
 column (ISO-8601 text, lexically sortable) with
ms.sql query,
 e.g. "SELECT seq, session id, role, created at, content FROM
hist.conversation history WHERE kind='beam chat turn' AND substr(created at,1,10)
BETWEEN '2024-07-01' AND '2024-07-31' ORDER BY seq LIMIT 50". For elapsed calendar
days between two dates, use ms.days between(d1,
 d2).
Treat role='user' rows as evidence of the user's facts, actions, and preferences;
an assistant suggestion is not evidence that the user adopted it. Preserve exact
numbers, units, and version labels from the most directly relevant user evidence;
do not replace them with illustrative values. Do not add repeated historical
mentions as separate quantities unless the question explicitly asks for that. When
a fact changed, use the latest user evidence only after confirming that the rows
describe the same project and the same fact, not merely similarly named work. Base
your answer only on recalled conversation evidence. Do not use information from
other history kinds. Follow any output-count or formatting constraint in the
question exactly. If the requested fact is absent, say so clearly.
Grounding rule (strict): every concrete claim --- each fact, number, name, date,
quantity, or event --- must come verbatim in meaning from a turn you retrieved.
Never invent specifics to make an answer sound complete.
Decide between answering and saying "not enough information" by what you actually
retrieved, not by how hard you searched: if a turn directly states the asked-for
fact, give it; if none does, say there is not enough information in the
conversation. A turn on a merely related topic is not the fact, and "not enough
information" is itself a correct, expected answer.
Always finish with submit answer and
 a non-empty, natural-language answer. Once
more searching stops improving your answer, commit it rather than continuing until
you run out. Never end without one.
LongMemEval rubric
The user's benchmark conversation history is stored in your durable history as rows
with kind='context msg' (user turns) or kind='model turn' (assistant turns). Every
turn's content opens with a [Session N | YYYY-MM-DD] role: tag. Rows are
chronologically ordered by seq; each session has a distinct session id; rows carry
an ISO created at.
Recall it with the recall history python tool: pass a Python cell that uses the
pre-bound ms surface. Search with concise keyword or synonym queries, e.g.
ms.search(QUERY, all agents=True, kind='context msg', k=10). Uppercase OR passes
through as a boolean operator; otherwise terms are AND-combined. Start with k=5 or
k=10 and increase it only when the evidence is insufficient. If a question
combines multiple named systems, efforts, or entities, search each one separately
instead of putting every name into one AND query. Extract one directly relevant
value for each part, preserve its unit, and only then calculate. Each hit already
includes the full turn text together with its seq, session id,
 role, and metadata;
17

Technical Report.
do not call ms.expand merely to pair a user message with its assistant reply. If
you must reread a returned turn, call ms.expand only with that hit's exact seq
neighbours (lo, hi). For a question about one source date or an inclusive date
range, filter on the created at
 column (ISO-8601 text, lexically sortable) with
ms.sql query,
 e.g. "SELECT seq, session id, role, created at, content FROM
hist.conversation history WHERE kind='context msg' AND substr(created at,1,10)
BETWEEN '2023-04-01' AND '2023-04-30' ORDER BY seq LIMIT 50". For elapsed calendar
days between two dates, use ms.days between(d1,
 d2).
Treat role='user' rows as evidence of the user's facts, actions, and preferences;
an assistant suggestion is not evidence that the user adopted it. Preserve exact
numbers, units, and version labels from the most directly relevant user evidence;
do not replace them with illustrative values. Do not add repeated historical
mentions as separate quantities unless the question explicitly asks for that. When
a fact changed, use the latest user evidence only after confirming that the rows
describe the same project and the same fact, not merely similarly named work. Base
your answer only on recalled conversation evidence. Do not use information from
other history kinds. Follow any output-count or formatting constraint in the
question exactly. If the requested fact is absent, say so clearly.
GROUNDING (strict): every concrete claim -- each fact, number, name, date,
quantity, or event -- must come verbatim in meaning from a turn you retrieved.
Never invent specifics to make an answer sound complete.
Decide between answering and abstaining by what you actually retrieved, not by how
hard you searched: if a turn directly states the asked-for fact, give it; if none
does, abstain with the exact phrase "I don't have that information from our
conversations." A turn on a merely related topic is not the fact, and abstaining is
itself a correct, expected answer when the fact is truly absent.
Always finish with submit answer and
 a non-empty, natural-language answer. Once
more searching stops improving your answer, commit it rather than continuing until
you run out. Never end without one.
D Example Trajectories
This appendix reproduces four trajectories from the BEAM
10M 
run reported in Table 6 (Scroll with Qwen3.8-
Max, extended reasoning enabled): two successes from the categories where Scroll scores highest (knowl-
edge update, 92.5; contradiction resolution, 88.1) and two failures from the categories where it trails the
best published systems (preference following, 89.1 vs. 97.5 for Hindsight; summarization, 70.5 vs. 91.9 for
Exabase M-1).
Each trajectory is shown in its logged JSON format (task id
, metrics, steps), abridged as fol-
lows. Model-authored code is moved from each step’s "source" field into the referenced code block and
is otherwise unedited, including the model’s own comments. "reasoning" (the model’s thinking be-
fore the action) and "observation" strings are excerpted, with elisions marked [...]; newlines inside
strings are rendered literally , and non-ASCII punctuation is normalized. Gray // lines are our annotations,
not part of the log; the steps our trajectory analysis identifies as decisive for the probe’s outcome are flagged
in bold color (// >> steps that drive the success, // >> steps where the failure is decided). seq denotes
an event’s immutable Event Log address; [Session n | date] prefixes are part of the stored events.
Judge scores are those of the benchmark-provided LLM judge.
18

Technical Report.
D.1 Success (knowledge update): resolving a superseded value by Event Log order
Probe (task 10M-1, category knowledge update; judge score 1.0 on all four rubric criteria):
“How many tasks have I logged in Jira for the sprint on 2024-11-05, and what is my sprint completion
target percentage?”
The queried values are updated within the relevant session (Session 42; 14→17 tasks, 85%→88%), amid
decoy sprints in Sessions 4, 22, and 47. The trajectory resolves the update by Event Log order: one search,
one SQL materialization, then in-kernel filters over the cached variable.
{"task_id": "beam/10M-1",
"metrics": {"tokens_in": 51224, "tokens_out": 1471, "wall_time_s": 36.62, "
step_count": 5},
"steps": [
// >> Success: One coarse search pins the right session (42) among the
// >> decoy sprints (Sessions 4, 22, 47), and both competing values already surface
// >> in the hits
{"step_index": 0,
"reasoning": "I need to find the mentions of Jira tasks for the sprint on
2024-11-05, and the sprint completion target percentage. Let me search for these
.",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 1}},
"observation": "
stdout:
8349 42 [Session 42 | 2024-11-05] user: I’m trying to update the task count in
Jira to reflect the new total of 17 tasks, and I want to make sure I’m doing it
correctly to meet our sprint completion target of
[...]
8123 42 [Session 42 | 2024-11-05] user: I’m trying to plan my sprint and I’ve
added 14 tasks for dynamic resizing, aiming for 85% sprint completion. I’m using
Jira 9
[...]
8350 42 [Session 42 | 2024-11-05] assistant: Great! Let’s update the task count
in Jira to reflect the new total of 17 tasks and ensure you’re on track to meet
your sprint completion target of 88%.
[...]
565 4 [Session 4 | 2024-07-05] user: I’ve added 10 feasibility tasks to my Jira
board, targeting 85% completion within t
[...]
4283 22 [Session 22 | 2024-08-05] user: I’m using Jira 9.5.0 to manage my
project, and I’ve added 18 tasks for ingestion strateg
[...]"},
// The queried values changed within Session 42 -- materialize the whole session in
// address order, bound to the kernel variable rows
{"step_index": 1,
"reasoning": "The search results show Session 42 (2024-11-05) which is the
relevant session. [...] the value CHANGED over time. Let me look at the full
session 42 to find the most recent values mentioned. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 2}},
"observation": "
stdout:
seq=8047 role=user: [Session 42 | 2024-11-05] user: I’m working on enhancing
the RAG system’s context window management, specifically focusing on dynamic
resizing based on query complexity, an
19

Technical Report.
[...]
[output too long: 96806 chars printed, over the 32000-char limit -- the rest is
hidden to protect your context window. Your variables persist, so re-run printing
LESS: a count or list of seqs, snippet=True for a bounded triage view, or
aggregate in a variable and print only the result -- not whole rows.]"},
// The 32K observation cap truncated the print, but rows persists --
// re-filter in the kernel with no Event Log re-access
{"step_index": 2,
"reasoning": "The result was too long. Let me print less - just the user turns and
key snippets about task counts and sprint completion percentages from Session
42.",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 3}},
"observation": "
[...]
seq=8047: [Session 42 | 2024-11-05] user: I’m working on enhancing the RAG
system’s context window management, specifically focus
[...]"},
// >> Success: establishes intra-session order by seq -- 8123 (14 tasks,
// >> 85%) precedes 8349 (17 tasks, 88%) -- exactly the evidence needed to ensure
// >> latest information holds
{"step_index": 3,
"reasoning": "I found key evidence: Session 42 on 2024-11-05. [...] I need to
check if there are any later mentions in session 42 that update these values
further. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 4}},
"observation": "
[...]
seq=8123: [Session 42 | 2024-11-05] user: I’m trying to plan my sprint and I’ve
added 14 tasks for dynamic resizing, aiming for 85% sprint completion. I’m using
Jira 9.6.0 to track my progress, but I’m not sure how to prioritize my tasks and
allocate my time e
[...]
seq=8349: [Session 42 | 2024-11-05] user: I’m trying to update the task count
in Jira to reflect the new total of 17 tasks, and I want to make sure I’m doing it
correctly to meet our sprint completion target of 88%
[...]"},
// later address supersedes earlier: seq 8349 (17 tasks, 88%) follows seq 8123 (14
// tasks, 85%); Session 47’s sprint is ruled out by date.
{"step_index": 4,
"reasoning": "[...] 1. seq=8123: User says "I’ve added 14 tasks for dynamic
resizing, aiming for 85% sprint completion" [...] The question asks specifically
about "the sprint on 2024-11-05". The most recent mention within that sprint is
seq=8349 with 17 tasks and 88% completion target. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "submit_answer",
"args": {"answer": "
For the sprint on 2024-11-05, you logged **17 tasks**
 
in Jira (updated from an
earlier count of 14), and your sprint completion target percentage is **88%**
 
(
updated from the initial 85%)."}}}
]}
Code Block 1: Knowledge update: full-text search; each hit returns its Event Log address (seq), session,
and snippet.
20

Technical Report.
hits = ms.search("sprint 2024-11-05", scope=’task’, k=20)
for h in hits:
print(h["seq"], h["step_index"], h["snippet"][:200])
Code Block 2: SQL materialization of Session 42 in address order, bound to the kernel variable rows.
rows = ms.sql_query(
"SELECT seq, role, content FROM hist.conversation_history WHERE kind=’
conversation’ AND step_index=42 ORDER BY msg_index"
)
for r in rows:
# Print just the first 300 chars to get an overview
print(f"seq={r[’seq’]} role={r[’role’]}: {r[’content’][:300]}")
print("---")
Code Block 3: In-kernel filter of the cached rows (user turns only); no Event Log access.
# Print only user turns from session 42, just first 200 chars each
for r in rows:
if r[’role’] == ’user’:
print(f"seq={r[’seq’]}: {r[’content’][:200]}")
print("---")
Code Block 4: Second in-kernel filter (user turns, seq≥8100), exposing the value progression.
# Look at user turns from seq 8100 onwards in session 42 to see progression
for r in rows:
if r[’role’] == ’user’ and r[’seq’] >= 8100:
# Print seq and a snippet around "task" or "sprint"
content = r[’content’]
print(f"seq={r[’seq’]}: {content[:250]}")
print("---")
D.2 Success (contradiction resolution): retrieving both sides of a conflict and ordering them
Probe (task 10M-10, category contradiction resolution; judge score 1.0 on all four rubric criteria):
“Has Pamela ever helped coordinate with vendors or saved setup time during my events?”
The rubric requires stating that the record is contradictory, citing the user’s correction, citing the earlier
claim, and resolving which is correct. The trajectory operationalizes this as a retrieval program: one query
per side of the conflict, provenance checks on both, and an address-bounded search that proves no later
reversal.
{"task_id": "beam/10M-10",
"metrics": {"tokens_in": 104160, "tokens_out": 5758, "wall_time_s": 132.78, "
step_count": 10},
"steps": [
// search the affirmative side of the conflict
{"step_index": 0,
"reasoning": "[...] I need to find all mentions of Pamela and vendor coordination/
setup time, identify the conflict, and determine which statement is the latest or
a correction. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
21

Technical Report.
"args": {"source": Code Block 5}},
"observation": "
stdout:
16900 73 ... Certainly! It sounds like Pamela took initiative to gather quick
ratings from three vendors, which helped streamline the feedback process and saved
[...]
8434 36 ... 1. 
**Morning
 Setup**:
- 
**Pamela**:
 Supervise the arrival and setup of vendors and decorators.
[...]
7254 31 ... Great to hear that Pamela is here to help! Given her experience
and maturity, she can be a valuable asset in managing t
[...]"},
// >> Success: the model authors an opposing, negation-term query for the
// >> ’against’ side of the conflict; the user’s correction surfaces at seq 8867
{"step_index": 1,
"reasoning": "The search results are showing that Pamela coordinated with vendors.
Next I need to find the contradictory information. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 6}},
"observation": "
[...]
8867 37 [Session 37 | 2023-07-15] user: How can I make sure Pamela is aware she
didn’t actually brief any entertainers or save me coordination time, as that
[...]"},
// materialize the correction exactly
{"step_index": 2,
"reasoning": "The search result at seq 8867 (Session 37) looks like it has key
information [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 7}},
"observation": "
stdout:
8867 user
[Session 37 | 2023-07-15] user: How can I make sure Pamela is aware she didn’t
actually brief any entertainers or save me coordination time, as that was a
misunderstanding?
---"},
// session-scoped SQL around the correction; the original delegation (seq 8675)
// sits in the same session
{"step_index": 3,
"reasoning": "[...] Now I need to check what was said earlier about Pamela
coordinating with vendors or saving setup time. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 8}},
"observation": "
[...]
seq 8675 [user]: [Session 37 | 2023-07-15] user: What’s the most efficient way
to brief the 5 entertainers, as Pamela had taken on this task earlier?
[...]"},
// expand the later, seemingly re-affirming mentions from Session 73
{"step_index": 4,
"reasoning": "[...] Let me look at the seq 16900 and 16902 hits from Session 73,
which seem to discuss Pamela’s vendor ratings and saved time. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
22

Technical Report.
"args": {"source": Code Block 9}},
"observation": "
[...]
seq 16902 [assistant]:
[Session 73 | 2023-08-22] assistant: You’re welcome! I’m glad that clarifying
Pamela’s actions helped you understand how her quick calls saved you time and
provided immediate insights.
[...]
2. 
**Time
 Saved**: By handling these calls herself, Pamela saved you
approximately 15 minutes of follow-up time.
[...]"},
// provenance check: those are assistant turns -- verify what the user actually
// said nearby; the user’s own later confirmation surfaces
{"step_index": 5,
"reasoning": "[...] this is assistant-generated text, not the user’s own statement
. I need to check whether the user in session 73 actually said something that led
to this assistant response, or if this wa [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 10}},
"observation": "
[...]
seq 16899 [user]: [Session 73 | 2023-08-22] user: Can you help me understand
why Pamela called 3 vendors for quick ratings, and how it saved me 15 minutes of
follow-up?
[...]
seq 16901 [user]: [Session 73 | 2023-08-22] user: Yeah, that makes sense.
Pamela’s quick calls definitely saved me time. It’s good to get those immediate
insights without having to follow up myself. Thanks for clarifying!
[...]"},
// the reasoning separates the two claims: ’coordination time’ during setup
// (corrected) vs. post-event ’follow-up time’ (confirmed)
{"step_index": 6,
"reasoning": "[...] The correction in Session 37 is about Pamela NOT briefing
entertainers or saving coordination time (a misunderstanding). [...] In Session
73, the user confirms Pamela called 3 vendors for quick ratings and saved 15
minutes of follow-up time. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 11}},
"observation": "
[...]
seq 8868 [assistant]: [Session 37 | 2023-07-15] assistant: To clarify the
misunderstanding with Pamela and ensure she is aware that she did not actually
brief any entertainers or save coordination time, it’s important to communicate
this information
[...]"},
// retrieve the claim side verbatim (Sessions 31 and 36)
{"step_index": 7,
"reasoning": "[...] **Earlier claims (pre-correction):**
 
Multiple sessions (31,
36) had assistant suggestions about Pamela supervising vendor arrival/setup,
coordinating with vendors, etc. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 12}},
"observation": "
[...]
seq 7496 [assistant]: [Session 31 | 2023-07-10] assistant: Delegating tasks
like decor oversight to someone like Pamela can have a significant positive impact
23

Technical Report.
on the overall timeli
[...]
seq 8434 [assistant]: [Session 36 | 2023-07-15] assistant: That sounds like an
excellent plan! By leveraging Pamela’s skills and experience, you can ensure that
the guest check-in
[...]"},
// >> Success: the disconfirming query -- an address-bounded search proving
// >> nothing after Session 73 overturns the correction.
// >> Across this run, successful trajectories issue such a query before
// >> submitting; but failed ones never do
{"step_index": 8,
"reasoning": "[...] The later statement (Session 73) would normally win. But I
need to check if there’s a later correction after Session 73 as well. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 13}},
"observation": "
stdout:
18077 77 [Session 77 | 2023-08-24] user: Yeah, it definitely caused some
frustration. Those 5 guests w
[...]"},
// each rubric criterion maps to evidence retrieved explicitly
{"step_index": 9,
"reasoning": "[...] So the resolution is nuanced: The user corrected that Pamela
did NOT brief entertainers or save coordination time during setup (that was a
misunderstanding), but later confirmed Pamela DID help by calling vendors for
quick ratings, saving follow-up time [...]",
"action": {"tool": "submit_answer",
"args": {"answer": "
The conversation contains conflicting information about this, and here’s how it
resolves:
**The
 initial claim:** In earlier sessions (around Sessions 31-36), plans were
made for Pamela to coordinate with vendors, supervise vendor arrivals/setup, and
brief entertainers -- with the expectation that this would save you coordination
time during the event.
**Your
 correction (Session 37, July 15, 2023):**
 
You explicitly clarified that
this was a misunderstanding -- Pamela did NOT actually brief any entertainers or
save you coordination time during setup. You asked how to make sure Pamela was
aware of this correction.
**A later,
 narrower confirmation (Session 73, August 22, 2023):**
 
You confirmed
that Pamela did call 3 vendors for quick ratings after the event, which saved you
about 15 minutes of follow-up time. You said: "Pamela’s quick calls definitely
saved me time."
**Resolution:** 
The broad claim that Pamela coordinated vendors and saved setup
time during your events was corrected by you as a misunderstanding (Session 37).
However, Pamela did help in a more limited, post-event way -- gathering quick
vendor ratings that saved you ˜15 minutes of follow-up (Session 73). So she didn’t
save setup time or coordinate vendors during the event itself, but she did
contribute afterward with vendor feedback calls."}}}
]}
Code Block 5: Contradiction resolution: full-text search on the claim side.
24

Technical Report.
hits = ms.search("Pamela vendor", scope=’task’, k=20)
for h in hits:
print(h["seq"], h["step_index"], h["snippet"][:150])
Code Block 6: Negation-term search for the correction side.
hits2 = ms.search("Pamela didn’t OR wasn’t OR never OR not", scope=’task’, k
=20)
for h in hits2:
print(h["seq"], h["step_index"], h["snippet"][:150])
Code Block 7: Exact materialization of the correction (ms.expand).
rows = ms.expand([8867])
for r in rows:
print(r["seq"], r["role"])
print(r["content"][:2000])
print("---")
Code Block 8: Session-scoped SQL over Session 37.
# Look at the assistant response after seq 8867 and surrounding context in
session 37
rows = ms.sql_query("SELECT seq, role, content FROM hist.conversation_history
WHERE kind=’conversation’ AND step_index=37 ORDER BY seq LIMIT 30")
for r in rows:
print(f"seq {r[’seq’]} [{r[’role’]}]: {r[’content’][:200]}")
print("---")
Code Block 9: Expansion of the post-correction mentions (seq 16900, 16902).
# Check later references (after the correction at seq 8867) about Pamela and
vendor coordination/setup time
rows = ms.expand([16900, 16902])
for r in rows:
print(f"seq {r[’seq’]} [{r[’role’]}]:")
print(r["content"][:600])
print("---")
Code Block 10: Provenance check—the user turns around seq 16900.
# Check what the user said in session 73 around seq 16900
rows = ms.sql_query("SELECT seq, role, content FROM hist.conversation_history
WHERE kind=’conversation’ AND step_index=73 AND seq BETWEEN 16890 AND
16910 ORDER BY seq")
for r in rows:
print(f"seq {r[’seq’]} [{r[’role’]}]: {r[’content’][:300]}")
print("---")
Code Block 11: The assistant’s uptake of the correction (seq 8868).
# Check the assistant response after the user’s correction at seq 8867
rows = ms.sql_query("SELECT seq, role, content FROM hist.conversation_history
WHERE kind=’conversation’ AND step_index=37 AND seq BETWEEN 8867 AND
8870 ORDER BY seq")
25

Technical Report.
for r in rows:
print(f"seq {r[’seq’]} [{r[’role’]}]: {r[’content’][:500]}")
print("---")
Code Block 12: The original claim side (Sessions 31 and 36).
# Let me also check the earlier sessions (31, 36) where Pamela was assigned
vendor coordination roles, to get the full picture of the "claim" side
rows = ms.expand([7496, 8434])
for r in rows:
print(f"seq {r[’seq’]} [{r[’role’]}]: {r[’content’][:400]}")
print("---")
Code Block 13: seq range-bounded search over the remainder of the history, proving no later reversal.
# Check if there are any later corrections about Pamela after session 73
hits3 = ms.search("Pamela misunderstanding OR correction OR didn’t OR wasn’t"
, scope=’task’, k=15, seq_range=(16900, 23716))
for h in hits3:
print(h["seq"], h["step_index"], h["snippet"][:200])
D.3 Failure (preference following): competent retrieval on the wrong axis
Probe (task 10M-8, category preference following; judge score 0.0 on all three rubric criteria):
“I’m planning the route for our upcoming trip. How would you suggest I map it out?”
All three criteria concern one stated preference: avoiding tolls. The retrieval patterns that succeed
elsewhere all execute correctly here—the failure is upstream, in query formulation: the model frames the
probe as which tool the user prefers and never queries the route-constraint axis. The graded preference is
abundant in the Event Log, in the user’s own words (seq 805: “which route would you say is better for
someone who wants to avoid tolls as much as possible?”; seq 807; Session 3, seq 617–631, where the hybrid
route is adopted because it saves $15 in tolls).
{"task_id": "beam/10M-8",
"metrics": {"tokens_in": 82830, "tokens_out": 2471, "wall_time_s": 69.19, "
step_count": 7},
"steps": [
// >> Failure: the outcome is decided here, before any retrieval runs --
// >> the probe is framed as ’which mapping tool’, all six queries name tools, and
// >> none of the trajectory’s 14 queries contains toll, fee, avoid, or cost,
// >> which is the axis all three rubric criteria grade
{"step_index": 0,
"reasoning": "[...] I need to find a preference they established earlier -- a
chosen tool, version, style, or constraint. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 14}},
"observation": "
stdout:
10016 43 ... Drag and drop the route lines to adjust the path according to the
detour.
[...]
8148 34 ... Compare the routes to see which one avoids tolls.
[...]
26

Technical Report.
662 3 ... Sync with Google Maps
While you cannot directly sync Google Maps with GasBuddy, you can use both apps
together
[...]"},
// >> Failure: the toll preference brushes past in the previous step’s hits
// >> (seq 8148, ’avoids tolls’) and goes unpursued; the model chases the Maps.me
// >> tool candidate instead
{"step_index": 1,
"reasoning": "[...] Let me also check seq 16614 which mentions Maps.me as a "
Current Tool". [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 15}},
"observation": "
[...]
16614 [Session 75 | 2023-04-20] assistant: Improving your detour accuracy and
saving time with navigation tools like Maps.me is a great achievement. Here are
some other n
[...]"},
// sound provenance discipline: the Maps.me hit is discarded as assistant-authored;
// five preference-phrase queries follow -- still tool-framed
{"step_index": 2,
"reasoning": "[...] that’s an assistant response. I need to find where the user
explicitly states their preference for a mapping tool. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 16}},
"observation": "
[...]
2349 10 ... That sounds like a solid plan! I’ll make sure to use Google Maps
and Roadtrippers to map out the hybrid route and share it with Chris. I’ll also
download off
[...]
17175 77 [Session 77 | 2023-04-22] user: That sounds great! I’ll definitely use
mapping tools like Google Maps and Waze to plan my routes and find good stopping
points.
[...]"},
// recency check over the final sessions:
// no later preference supersedes the finding
{"step_index": 3,
"reasoning": "[...] Let me look more closely at the most recent user turns about
mapping, especially in later sessions (82-100), [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 17}},
"observation": "
(no output)"},
// user-authored evidence for the tool preference accumulates (Sessions 1, 10, 13)
{"step_index": 4,
"reasoning": "[...] the user has consistently used **Roadtrippers**
 
and **Google
Maps**
 
together. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 18}},
"observation": "
[...]
2335 10 ... That sounds perfect! I’ll use Google Maps and Roadtrippers to map
out the hybrid route and share it with Chris. We’ll definitely need to download
offline maps for a
27

Technical Report.
[...]
25 [Session 1 | 2022-05-01] user: How does the Roadtrippers app work, and can
it really help me visualize a route that covers at least 5 national parks?
[...]"},
// scope the upcoming trip (Session 100):
// a 1,200-mile northern route, four landmarks
{"step_index": 5,
"reasoning": "[...] check if there’s anything in the most recent sessions (S100,
seq 22221-22560) about a specific route they’re planning for the "upcoming trip
[...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 19}},
"observation": "
[...]
22221 user [Session 100 | 2023-05-31] user: What’s the best way to plan a
1,200-mile northern route within 9 months, aiming for 4 key landmarks, like I’ve
targeted?
[...]"},
// The answer is grounded and well-structured, but without toll information.
// Judge: 0.0 on all three criteria.
{"step_index": 6,
"reasoning": "[...] The most recent and repeated preference is **Google Maps and
Roadtrippers** used together. The user consistently says they’ll use both to map
out routes. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "submit_answer",
"args": {"answer": "
Based on our past conversations, you’ve consistently used **Google Maps and
Roadtrippers** together to map out your routes -- you mentioned this combination
multiple times, including when planning the hybrid route with Chris and when
scouting scenic areas. I’d suggest sticking with that approach for your upcoming
1,200-mile northern route to your 4 key landmarks:
[...]
1. 
**Roadtrippers
 first**
 
-- Plot your 4 landmarks as waypoints and use it to
discover scenic stops, detours, and points of interest along the northern route.
It’s great for visualizing the overall tri
[...]
This two-tool combo has worked well for you across multiple trips, so it should
serve you well for this one too."}}}
]}
Code Block 14: Preference following: multi-query sweep, de-duplicated by address; all six queries name
tools.
# Search for mapping tool preferences in the conversation
hits = []
for q in ["map route", "Google Maps", "Roadtrippers", "mapping tool", "app
route", "map out"]:
hits += ms.search(q, scope=’task’, k=10)
# Print unique hits with snippets for triage
seen = set()
for h in hits:
if h["seq"] not in seen:
seen.add(h["seq"])
print(h["seq"], h["step_index"], h.get("snippet", "")[:150])
28

Technical Report.
print("---")
Code Block 15: Expansion of the Maps.me candidate (seq 16614).
# Let me look at the user’s own turns about mapping tools, especially from
later sessions
# First check seq 16614 which mentions Maps.me as "Current Tool"
rows = ms.expand([16614])
for r in rows:
print(r["seq"], r["content"][:500])
print("---")
Code Block 16: Preference-phrase sweep plus a Roadtrippers query—still tool-framed.
# Search for user turns specifically about their preferred mapping tool
hits2 = []
for q in ["I’ll use", "I prefer", "my favorite", "I’ve been using", "I use"]:
hits2 += ms.search(f"{q} map", scope=’task’, k=10)
# Also search for Roadtrippers specifically in user turns
hits3 = ms.search("Roadtrippers route plan", scope=’task’, k=15)
seen2 = set()
for h in hits2 + hits3:
if h["seq"] not in seen2:
seen2.add(h["seq"])
print(h["seq"], h["step_index"], h.get("snippet", "")[:160])
print("---")
Code Block 17: seq range-bounded recency check over the final sessions.
# Look at user turns in later sessions about mapping tools
hits4 = ms.search("map route plan", seq_range=(18323, 22716), scope=’task’, k
=20)
for h in hits4:
if h.get("role") == "user":
print(h["seq"], h["step_index"], h.get("snippet", "")[:180])
print("---")
Code Block 18: User-turn search plus session-scoped SQL over Session 1.
# Check user turns specifically mentioning their chosen mapping approach
# Focus on user turns that state what they’ll use or prefer
hits5 = ms.search("Google Maps Roadtrippers map out", scope=’task’, k=15)
for h in hits5:
if h.get("role") == "user":
print(h["seq"], h["step_index"], h.get("snippet", "")[:200])
print("---")
# Also check the earliest session where Roadtrippers was introduced
print("\n=== Session 1 user turns about Roadtrippers ===")
rows_s1 = ms.sql_query("SELECT seq, role, content FROM hist.
conversation_history WHERE kind=’conversation’ AND step_index=1 AND role
=’user’ AND content LIKE ’%Roadtrippers%’ ORDER BY msg_index LIMIT 5")
29

Technical Report.
for r in rows_s1:
print(r["seq"], r["content"][:300])
print("---")
Code Block 19: Reading the opening of Session 100 to scope the upcoming trip.
# Check the most recent session (S100) for context about the upcoming trip
rows_s100 = ms.sql_query("SELECT seq, role, content FROM hist.
conversation_history WHERE kind=’conversation’ AND step_index=100 ORDER
BY msg_index LIMIT 10")
for r in rows_s100:
print(r["seq"], r["role"], r["content"][:250])
print("---")
D.4 Failure (summarization): positional sampling misses mid-session evidence
Probe (task 10M-8, category summarization; judge score 0.42—two of six rubric criteria fully satisfied,
one partially):
“Can you summarize how my travel decisions and habits evolved from April 8, 2023 to April 25, 2023
and how they influenced my overall experience and personal growth?”
Coverage at session granularity is complete: cells 0–6 page and merge all 4,448 events in the date range
(Sessions 61–80, verified gap-free). The score is then decided by sampling choices within that coverage:
the trajectory reads long mixed-topic sessions positionally (head and tail) rather than thematically, and the
graded mid-session facts—the 3-hour driving cap with its fatigue reduction (Session 77, seq 17171–17207)
and the sleep and hydration goals (Session 66, seq 14809–14817)—never enter an observation.
{"task_id": "beam/10M-8",
"metrics": {"tokens_in": 197973, "tokens_out": 8846, "wall_time_s": 221.2, "
step_count": 14},
"steps": [
// date-range SQL over event metadata; both the 1000-row cap and the 32K
observation
// cap bite -- the model pivots to paging
{"step_index": 0,
"reasoning": "[...] First, I need to find the conversations within this date range
. I’ll try using SQL to filter by date.",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 20}},
"observation": "
stdout:
1000
13611 61 2023-04-08 user [Session 61 | 2023-04-08] user: What’s the best way to
spend our last day in Los Angeles bef
[...]
[note] a sql_query hit the 1000-row cap -- matching rows beyond the first 1000
were NOT returned; narrow with WHERE or page with LIMIT/OFFS
[...]"},
// aggregate per session in the kernel: page 1 reaches only 2023-04-13
{"step_index": 1,
"reasoning": "The result got cut off at 1000 rows. Need to paginate. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 21}},
30

Technical Report.
"observation": "
stdout:
1000 13611 14610 2023-04-13
61 [’2023-04-08’] 188
62 [’2023-04-09’] 222
63 [’2023-04-10’] 196
64 [’2023-04-11’] 190
65 [’2023-04-12’] 194
66 [’2023-04-13’] 10"},
// page the remainder; steps 3-5 rerun this query changing only the OFFSET
{"step_index": 2,
"reasoning": "[...] I need to fetch the remaining period (April 13-25). [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 22}},
"observation": "
stdout:
1000
66 [’2023-04-13’] 268
67 [’2023-04-14’] 200
68 [’2023-04-15’] 198
69 [’2023-04-15’] 196
70 [’2023-04-15’] 138
15600 2023-04-15"},
{"step_index": 3,
"reasoning": "I need to continue paging through the data and keep collecting the
remaining pages until I reach April 25th.",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 22 (OFFSET 1000)}},
"observation": "
stdout:
1000 16600 2023-04-20
[...]"},
{"step_index": 4,
"reasoning": "On track -- continuing the paging to cover April 20-25.",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 22 (OFFSET 2000)}},
"observation": "
stdout:
1000 17600 2023-04-24
[...]"},
{"step_index": 5,
"reasoning": "[...] Let me fetch the last page (the remainder from April 24th
onwards) to complete the coverage, [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 22 (OFFSET 3000)}},
"observation": "
stdout:
458
79 [’2023-04-24’] 178
80 [’2023-04-25’] 280"},
// merge and de-duplicate by seq in the kernel: 4,448 events, Sessions 61-80,
verified
// gap-free -- session-level coverage is complete. Note Session 77’s size: 470
events
31

Technical Report.
{"step_index": 6,
"reasoning": "[...] Next I need to merge everything into one complete dataset (
deduplication), [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 23}},
"observation": "
[...]
4448 13611 2023-04-08 18058 2023-04-25
[...]
61 [’2023-04-08’] 188 13611 13798
[...]
77 [’2023-04-22’] 470 16909 17378
[...]
80 [’2023-04-25’] 280 17779 18058"},
// >> Failure: the first of the two sampling choices that decide the score
// >> -- positional reading (first 3 + last 2 user turns per session);
// >> head-and-tail reads of 200-470-row mixed-topic sessions systematically
// >> skip the middle, where habit threads sit
{"step_index": 7,
"reasoning": "[...] that’s about 2200 user turns, way too much. Better approach:
for each session, print the first few and last few user turns.",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 24}},
"observation": "
[...]
=== Session 61 (2023-04-08) -- 94 user turns ===
[...]
13611: [S61 | 2023-04-08] U: What’s the best way to spend our last day in Los
Angeles before heading home, considering we’re starting the final stretch of our
2,500-mi
[...]"},
// >> Failure: the deep read stays head-only (first 6 user turns of 7 sessions);
// >> the graded driving-limit arc sits 100 user turns into Session 77
// >> (seq 17171-17207) and is never reached -- even though this read surfaces ’I’m
// >> trying to manage my travel fatigue’ (Session 63) as a lead
{"step_index": 8,
"reasoning": "[...] To grasp the main components, let me try sampling a few turns
from each session in more detail. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 25}},
"observation": "
[...]
########## SESSION 61 (2023-04-08) ##########
[...]
--- seq 13611 ---
[Session 61 | 2023-04-08] user: What’s the best way to spend our last day in
Los Angeles before heading home, considering we’re starting the final stretch of
ou
[...]"},
// >> Failure: the second sampling choice -- the trajectory’s only thematic
// >> search covers growth vocabulary exclusively; the probe asks about
// >> ’decisions AND habits’, but no query ever names driving hours, fatigue,
// >> sleep, or hydration (the graded habit dimensions)
{"step_index": 9,
"reasoning": "[...] Let me search for growth-related turns and key decisions
within a few sessions. [...]",
32

Technical Report.
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 26}},
"observation": "
[...]
15489 ... I feel like I learned a lot about myself and our relationship during
that hike.
[...]"},
// verbatim grounding of the growth quantifications (40% patience, 35% flexibility,
// 82% self-rating) -- these earn the fully satisfied criteria
{"step_index": 10,
"reasoning": "[...] Let me expand a few of the key seqs to get verbatim details.
[...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 27}},
"observation": "
[...]
=== seq 15489 | role=user ===
[Session 70 | 2023-04-15] user: Yeah, the Grand Canyon hike was definitely a
standout moment. It pushed us both physically and mentally, and seeing the canyon
was breathtaking. It made me realize how much I can accomplish with determination
and teamwork. Plus, it gave me a new perspective on life and made me appreciate
nature more. I feel like I learned a lot about myself and our relationship during
that hike.
[...]"},
// budget details land ($70 Pittsburgh delay, $250 food overspend); the
// sleep/hydration cluster (seq 14809-14817, mid-Session 66) is never touched
{"step_index": 11,
"reasoning": "[...] let me gather a few more specific points: budget details ($250
food overspend, Pittsburgh delay $70), habit changes (session 72, screen time),
[...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 28}},
"observation": "
[...]
HIT 17368 ... In this case, the total overspend on food is $250, with $60
coming from a single diner visit in LA. Here’s a structured approach to
[...]"},
// final spot checks; the model declares coverage sufficient
{"step_index": 12,
"reasoning": "[...] Actually, I have enough material. [...]",
"action": {"tool": "recall_history_python",
"args": {"source": Code Block 29}},
"observation": "
[...]
[Session 79 | 2023-04-24] assistant: Limiting trips to 2 stops max played a
significant role in my overall personal growth, particularly in handling
unexpected detours and fee
[...]"},
// judge: 0.42 -- two of six criteria fully satisfied, one partial. Everything the
// rubric graded was inside the materialized sessions; the misses (3-hour driving
// cap, Session 77; 8-hour sleep and hydration goals, Session 66) fell outside the
// sampled positions
{"step_index": 13,
33

Technical Report.
"reasoning": "[...] Let me do a final coverage check against what the question is
ask [...]",
"action": {"tool": "submit_answer",
"args": {"answer": "
**The
 arc, April 8-25, 2023 (Sessions 61-80):**
 
Your travel decisions evolved
through three clear phases: (1) **wrap-up logistics** in Los Angeles (Apr 8-10),
(2) **deliberate rest and the journey home**
 
(Apr 13-16), and (3) **post-trip
processing, sharing, and lesson-building** back in New Jeffreytow
[...]
You 
**quantified
 your growth**: 40% more patience (later framed as a 40%
increase in confidence and adaptability), 35% more flexibility after the 5
unplanned detours, and an overall trip-growth self-rating of 82%.
[...]
By April 25 you had distilled **4 key trip lessons**
 
-- "Flexibility is Key"
and "Embrace Spontaneity" among them -- and begun journaling to sustain the gains.
Your unplanned stops reshaped your future travel philosophy: looser itineraries
with buffer time, openness to local recommendations, and fewer, deeper stops
rather than rigid day-by-day plans."}}}
]}
Code Block 20: Summarization: date-range SQL over event metadata (2023-04-08 to 2023-04-25).
rows = ms.sql_query(
"SELECT seq, step_index, json_extract(metadata,’$.date’) AS date, role,
headline, substr(content, 1, 200) AS preview "
"FROM hist.conversation_history WHERE kind=’conversation’ "
"AND json_extract(metadata,’$.date’) BETWEEN ’2023-04-08’ AND
’2023-04-25’ "
"ORDER BY msg_index")
print(len(rows))
for r in rows:
print(r[’seq’], r[’step_index’], r[’date’], r[’role’], (r[’preview’] or ’
’)[:120].replace(’\n’,’ ’))
Code Block 21: Per-session aggregation of page 1 in the kernel.
rows_all = list(rows)
print(len(rows_all), rows_all[0][’seq’], rows_all[-1][’seq’], rows_all[-1][’
date’])
# Aggregate per session: date range
from collections import defaultdict
sess = defaultdict(lambda: {’dates’: set(), ’roles’: 0})
for r in rows_all:
sess[r[’step_index’]][’dates’].add(r[’date’])
sess[r[’step_index’]][’roles’] += 1
for s in sorted(sess):
print(s, sorted(sess[s][’dates’]), sess[s][’roles’])
Code Block 22: Paging query; steps 3–5 rerun it changing only the OFFSET.
rows2 = ms.sql_query(
"SELECT seq, step_index, json_extract(metadata,’$.date’) AS date, role,
substr(content,1,180) AS preview "
"FROM hist.conversation_history WHERE kind=’conversation’ "
"AND json_extract(metadata,’$.date’) BETWEEN ’2023-04-13’ AND
34

Technical Report.
’2023-04-25’ "
"ORDER BY msg_index LIMIT 1000 OFFSET 0")
print(len(rows2))
rows2 = list(rows2)
from collections import defaultdict
sess2 = defaultdict(lambda: {’dates’: set(), ’n’: 0})
for r in rows2:
sess2[r[’step_index’]][’dates’].add(r[’date’])
sess2[r[’step_index’]][’n’] += 1
for s in sorted(sess2):
print(s, sorted(sess2[s][’dates’]), sess2[s][’n’])
print(rows2[-1][’seq’], rows2[-1][’date’])
Code Block 23: Kernel-side merge of all five pages, de-duplicated by seq.
# Merge all pages by seq (dedupe)
all_turns = {}
for coll in [rows_all, rows2, rows3, rows4, rows5]:
for r in coll:
all_turns[r[’seq’]] = r
merged = [all_turns[k] for k in sorted(all_turns)]
print(len(merged), merged[0][’seq’], merged[0][’date’], merged[-1][’seq’],
merged[-1][’date’])
from collections import defaultdict
sess_all = defaultdict(lambda: {’dates’: set(), ’n’: 0, ’first_seq’: None, ’
last_seq’: None})
for r in merged:
d = sess_all[r[’step_index’]]
d[’dates’].add(r[’date’])
d[’n’] += 1
if d[’first_seq’] is None:
d[’first_seq’] = r[’seq’]
d[’last_seq’] = r[’seq’]
for s in sorted(sess_all):
print(s, sorted(sess_all[s][’dates’]), sess_all[s][’n’], sess_all[s][’
first_seq’], sess_all[s][’last_seq’])
Code Block 24: Positional sampling—first 3 and last 2 user turns per session.
from collections import defaultdict
sess_turns = defaultdict(list)
for r in merged:
sess_turns[r[’step_index’]].append(r)
# Print first 3 and last 2 user turns per session to get arc
for s in sorted(sess_turns):
users = [r for r in sess_turns[s] if r[’role’] == ’user’]
print(f"=== Session {s} ({users[0][’date’]}) -- {len(users)} user turns
===")
for r in users[:3] + users[-2:]:
txt = r[’preview’].replace(’[Session ’, ’[S’).replace(’] user: ’, ’]
U: ’)
print(f" {r[’seq’]}: {txt[:160]}")
print()
35

Technical Report.
Code Block 25: Head-only deep read (first 6 user turns) of sessions 61, 63, 66, 70, 76, 77, 80.
# Pull full user-turn content for decision-rich sessions and print to read
import json
def full_content(seq):
rr = ms.sql_query("SELECT content FROM hist.conversation_history WHERE
seq=?", (seq,))
return rr[0][’content’] if rr else None
# Sample: first ˜6 user turns of sessions 61,63,66,70,76,77,80
for s in [61,63,66,70,76,77,80]:
ut = [r for r in sess_turns[s] if r[’role’]==’user’]
print(f"\n########## SESSION {s} ({ut[0][’date’]}) ##########")
for r in ut[:6]:
c = full_content(r[’seq’])
print(f"\n--- seq {r[’seq’]} ---")
print(c[:600])
Code Block 26: The trajectory’s only thematic search—growth vocabulary, bounded to the date range.
hits = []
for q in ["personal growth", "lessons learned", "personal growth trip", "
growth", "changed me", "learned about myself"]:
hits += ms.search(q, seq_range=(13611, 18058), scope=’task’, k=6)
seen = {}
for h in hits:
if h[’seq’] not in seen:
seen[h[’seq’]] = h
print(len(seen))
for seq, h in sorted(seen.items()):
print(seq, h.get(’snippet’,’’)[:160].replace(’\n’,’ ’))
Code Block 27: Verbatim expansion of eight growth-evidence addresses.
rows = ms.expand([15138, 15489, 16441, 16678, 16824, 17216, 17712, 17932])
for r in rows:
print(f"=== seq {r[’seq’]} | role={r[’role’]} ===")
print(r[’content’][:900])
print()
Code Block 28: Targeted expansions plus two budget searches.
rows = ms.expand([16009, 16018])
for r in rows:
print(f"=== seq {r[’seq’]} | role={r[’role’]} ===")
print(r[’content’][:800])
print()
# also search budget / Pittsburgh delay / food overspend
hits2 = ms.search("Pittsburgh delay", seq_range=(13611,18058), scope=’task’,
k=5)
for h in hits2:
print("HIT", h[’seq’], h.get(’snippet’,’’)[:200].replace(’\n’,’ ’))
hits3 = ms.search("food overspend", seq_range=(13611,18058), scope=’task’, k
=5)
for h in hits3:
36

Technical Report.
print("HIT", h[’seq’], h.get(’snippet’,’’)[:200].replace(’\n’,’ ’))
Code Block 29: Final point reads (seq 16685, 17712).
# Quick final check: confirm the "2 stops max" and "future travel" decision
details from seq 17712 and 16678 context
r1 = ms.sql_query("SELECT content FROM hist.conversation_history WHERE seq
=16685")
print(r1[0][’content’][:500])
r2 = ms.sql_query("SELECT content FROM hist.conversation_history WHERE seq
=17712")
print(r2[0][’content’][:300])
37
