
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2608.02786
GitHub: https://github.com/priyanka25aug/llm-failure-taxonomy

Evaluation Blindness: How Silent Measurement
Failures
Corrupt AI Systems from Training to Deployment
Priyanka Bajaj
Independent Researcher
https://github.com/priyanka25aug/llm-failure-taxonomy
Abstract
AI systems can fail silently. When they
do, the failure propagates undetected
— through training loops, evaluation
pipelines, and production monitoring
stacks — until downstream harm makes
it visible. We identify evaluation blind-
ness as the unifying structural property
of this failure mode: a measurement
function M exhibits evaluation blind-
ness with respect to a failure class F if
M produces a value indistinguishable
from a non-failing state while the sys-
tem is failing, and no auxiliary signal
flags the discrepancy.
Evaluation blindness manifests at two
distinct lifecycle stages that the litera-
ture has treated separately. At training
time, it appears when reward models
are gamed, importance-sampling cor-
rections are silently miscalculated, or
benchmark contamination inflates fine-
tuning evaluations — all cases where
gradient signal and loss curves look
healthy while the trained policy is being
corrupted. At deployment time, it ap-
pears when evaluation frameworks fail
to detect the six classes of production
failure we taxonomise: Model Drift,
Infrastructure, Integration, Evaluation,
Safety & Compliance, and Operational
— the last of which is 100% silent by its
structural definition.
We make four contributions. First, a
formal definition of evaluation blind-
ness with a detectability predicate that
unifies training-time and deployment-
time measurement failure under a sin-
gle framework. Second, four docu-
mented training-time case studies — in-
cluding a concrete implementation bug
in a widely-used open-source RL train-
ing library (TRL PR #6594) — where
the loss decreases normally while gra-
dients are corrupted. Third, a six-class
system-level failure taxonomy validated
against 50 real-world production inci-
dents from court documents, regulatory
filings, and public postmortems, finding
that 53% of verifiable public incidents
are silent. Fourth, a per-use-case failure
budget framework formalising accept-
able failure rates by risk class (Decision-
Critical, Customer-Facing, Internal Pro-
ductivity, Experimental).
The unified framing has a direct
engineering implication: measurement
infrastructure is a correctness concern
at every stage of the AI system lifecycle,
not only at model evaluation time. All
data, code, and the taxonomy schema
are released at https://github.
com/priyanka25aug/llm-
failure-taxonomy.
1 Introduction
1.1 The Common Thread Across Three AI
Disasters
In 2023, a New York attorney submitted a le-
gal brief containing citations to six non-existent
cases, all generated by ChatGPT. The sanctions
opinion in Mata v. Avianca [31] documented the
harm. What is less often noted is why the failure
was not caught: the attorney’s review process
— the measurement function for “is this citation
correct?” — produced no distinguishing signal
between real and fabricated case names. The
legal citation looked valid.
That same year, Air Canada operated a cus-
tomer service chatbot that told a grieving pas-
senger he could apply for a bereavement fare
retroactively — a policy that does not exist [5].
The British Columbia Civil Resolution Tribunal
found Air Canada liable. What failed was not
model accuracy but the system’s measurement
infrastructure: no component verified chatbot
1
arXiv:2608.02786v1 [cs.LG] 3 Aug 2026

claims against a live policy database before pre-
senting them to a user as authoritative. The out-
put passed every implicit quality check in the
integration pipeline.
The UK Post Office Horizon system [23], in op-
eration from 1999 onward, produced accounting
discrepancies that led to the wrongful prosecu-
tion of more than 700 sub-postmasters. The ac-
counting outputs were logged, audited, and acted
upon — but the audit function itself was broken.
Measurement infrastructure treated system out-
put as ground truth, so the failures propagated
undetected for years.
All three incidents are AI system failures. All
three share a structural property: the measure-
ment function that should have caught the
failure produced a value indistinguishable
from a non-failing state. No alert fired. No
quality metric degraded. The failures were in-
visible to the observability infrastructure until
downstream harm made them visible. We call
this evaluation blindness.
1.2 Evaluation Blindness at Training and De-
ployment Time
The same structural property appears earlier in
the AI lifecycle, during model training, where it
has gone largely unrecognised.
Consider a reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) training run where the reward
model is gamed: the policy learns to produce
outputs that score highly on the proxy reward
while degrading on the actual user utility cri-
terion [9, 30]. The training loss decreases nor-
mally. The reward curves look healthy. No gradi-
ent error fires. The evaluation infrastructure that
would detect the quality degradation — a gold-
standard human preference evaluation — is not
run inline with training. The failure is invisible
until post-deployment quality review.
A more concrete instance: in the Group Rel-
ative Policy Optimisation (GRPO) implemen-
tation in the Hugging Face TRL library [12],
a single-line miscalculation in the importance-
sampling ratio correction caused the per-token
ratio to be silently replaced by a sequence-mean
during KL divergence bias correction. The train-
ing loss decreased. The policy appeared to im-
prove on the evaluation metrics. The gradient
computation was wrong for the entire duration
of the affected runs, and the error was surfaced
only when a contributor compared the TRL im-
plementation against the DeepSeek-V3 speci-
fication [27]. This is a training-time evalua-
tion blindness event: the measurement function
(training loss and reward curves) produced a
value consistent with correct training while the
gradients were corrupted.
The literature has treated training-time failures
[9] and deployment-time silent failures [14, 17,
28] as separate research programmes. We argue
they are the same problem at different lifecycle
stages, and that a unified framework resolves the
false separation.
1.3 The Gap in Existing Frameworks
Sculley et al. [25] identified hidden technical
debt in ML systems — entanglement, feedback
loops, undeclared consumers — but predated
modern LLM deployments. Amershi et al. [2]
addressed ML engineering process failures with-
out capturing LLM-specific modes. Paleyes et al.
[20] surveyed pre-LLM deployment challenges.
LLM-specific work focuses on model-layer phe-
nomena: hallucination surveys [11, 13], adver-
sarial inputs [10, 22, 32], and alignment fail-
ures [3]. Recent work has begun cataloguing
deployment-time silent failures [14, 17, 21, 28],
and separate work addresses training-time re-
ward corruption [9]. No prior work (a) pro-
vides a formal definition of the common struc-
tural property, (b) unifies training-time and
deployment-time measurement failure under a
single framework, or (c) introduces a formal
acceptable-failure-rate model calibrated to regu-
latory practice.
1.4 Contributions
This paper makes four contributions:
1. A formal definition of evaluation blind-
ness — a structural property of measure-
ment functions that applies at both train-
ing time and deployment time — with a
detectability predicate and lifecycle stag-
ing.
2. Four documented training-time eval-
uation blindness case studies, includ-
ing the GRPO importance-sampling bug
(TRL PR #6594) as a concrete, verifiable
instance where a training run produces
plausible metrics while gradients are cor-
rupted.
3. A
 six-class system-level failure taxon-
omy with sub-classes, detectability pro-
2

files, and blast radius characterisation, val-
idated against 50 real-world production
incidents from verifiable public sources
(court documents, regulatory filings, aca-
demic papers, postmortems).
4. A
 per-use-case failure budget frame-
work formalising acceptable failure rates
by risk class, with a reference implemen-
tation for computing failure budget utili-
sation in production.
Section 2 formalises evaluation blindness. Sec-
tion 3 reviews related work. Section 4 introduces
the taxonomy. Section 5 defines the six failure
classes. Section 6 documents training-time eval-
uation blindness. Section 7 presents the failure
budget framework. Section 8 describes dataset
construction and validation. Sections 9 and 10
discuss implications and open problems.
2 Evaluation Blindness: Formal Defi-
nition
2.1 The Structural Property
A wide range of AI system failures share a struc-
tural property that is distinct from the observable
symptom (wrong output, degraded quality, pol-
icy violation) and distinct from the root cause
(data drift, reward hacking, missing runbook).
The shared property is that the measurement
function that should detect the failure produces
a value consistent with a non-failing state.
Definition 1 (Evaluation Blindness). Let S be
an AI system in state space S, and let M : S →
R
k 
be a measurement function (a loss function,
evaluation metric, monitoring signal, or com-
posite thereof) with non-failing reference distri-
bution D
ok
. A system state s ∈ S in failure class
F exhibits evaluation blindness with respect to
M if:
M (s) 
d
≈ D
ok 
and ∄ auxiliary signal 
ˆ
M s.t. 
ˆ
M (s) /∈ D 
ˆ
M
ok
where 
d
≈ denotes distributional indistinguisha-
bility up to tolerance ε and D 
ˆ
M
ok 
is the reference
distribution for 
ˆ
M 
. Informally: the system is
failing and no measurement in the currently de-
ployed set M detects it.
Definition 2 (Structural vs. Incidental Evalu-
ation Blindness). Let M
∗ 
denote the set of
all structurally available measurement functions
given the system’s observable signals. Evalu-
ation blindness is structural if δ(s, M
∗
) = 0:
no function of the available signals can distin-
guish s from D
ok
. It is incidental if δ(s, M) = 0
but δ(s, M
∗
) = 1: the failure is detectable in
principle, but the required measurement has not
been deployed.
The distinction has a direct remediation impli-
cation. Structural evaluation blindness requires
a different measurement modality (e.g. a gold-
label human preference evaluation that does not
exist as a deployable system signal); inciden-
tal evaluation blindness requires deploying a
known-but-absent monitor (e.g. a PII regex on
outputs never configured). Most C4, C1, and
C3 deployment-time failures in our dataset are
incidental; the GRPO IS ratio bug (Section 6)
is structural — no training-time measurement
could have flagged the gradient corruption with-
out external specification comparison.
2.2 Detectability Predicate
We define a binary detectability predicate
δ(s, M) where M = {M
1
, . . . , M
n
} is the set
of all deployed measurement functions:
δ(s, M) =
(
1 if ∃ M
i 
∈ M s.t. M
i
(s) /∈ D
M
i
ok
0 otherwise
A failure is evaluation-blind if δ(s, M) = 0
for the current measurement set. Mean Time to
Detection (MTTD) is infinite under a static M;
in practice the failure surfaces when M is aug-
mented (new monitor added), when downstream
harm creates an observable signal outside M, or
when a human audit reviews outputs directly.
2.3 Lifecycle Staging
Evaluation blindness occurs at two distinct
stages of the AI system lifecycle:
Training-time evaluation blindness..The mea-
surement set M consists of training loss, reward
curves, and held-out benchmark evaluation. A
failure state s is training-blind if the loss de-
creases normally, the reward looks healthy, and
benchmark scores are stable while the model
being trained is being corrupted. Root causes
include: reward model gaming, importance-
sampling miscalculation, benchmark contamina-
tion, and mode collapse in policy optimisation.
Section 6 documents four concrete instances.
3

Deployment-time evaluation blindness..The
measurement set M consists of production mon-
itoring (error rates, latency, alerting) and eval-
uation pipelines (offline benchmarks, LLM-as-
judge scorers). A failure state s is deployment-
blind if production monitoring and evaluation
pipelines both fail to flag the failure. In our
empirical dataset, 53% of 36 verifiable pub-
lic production incidents are deployment-time
evaluation-blind (52% across all 50 including
synthetic composites). The C4 Evaluation fail-
ure class is 100% blind by definition (the mea-
surement infrastructure is the failed component).
The unifying consequence..Both lifecycle
stages share the same engineering prescription:
measurement infrastructure must be treated as a
first-class correctness concern. Adding sensors
to M — whether training-time (gold-label pref-
erence eval inline with RLHF) or deployment-
time (distributional monitoring, citation verifica-
tion) — is the remediation path. Section 6 and
the taxonomy in Section 5 provide a structured
inventory of what M must contain at each stage
to achieve δ = 1 for each failure class.
3 Related Work
3.1 ML System Reliability
The foundational contribution of Sculley et al.
[25] introduced the concept of technical debt in
ML systems, identifying entanglement, hidden
feedback loops, undeclared consumers, and un-
stable data dependencies as recurring failure pat-
terns. These patterns remain relevant for LLM
systems, but the taxonomy predates the modern
deployment stack entirely: it does not address
serving infrastructure for large models, RAG
pipelines, prompt injection, or the compliance
requirements introduced by the EU AI Act [7]
and the Digital Operational Resilience Act [6].
Amershi et al. [2] identified three software engi-
neering challenges specific to ML: data collec-
tion and management, model building, and de-
ployment monitoring. Their framework applies
to supervised learning systems and does not ad-
dress the non-determinism, prompt sensitivity,
or context-window constraints of autoregressive
LLMs.
Paleyes et al. [20] surveyed 35 case studies of
ML deployment, identifying data, model, code,
and organisational failure categories. Their re-
view covers pre-LLM deployments and lacks
the RAG, tool-call, and safety-compliance sub-
classes relevant to contemporary production sys-
tems.
3.2 LLM Failure Analysis
Hallucination surveys [11, 13] provide the most
rigorous model-layer failure taxonomies avail-
able, distinguishing intrinsic and extrinsic hal-
lucinations, faithfulness failures, and factuality
failures. These are essential for understand-
ing model-layer behaviour but do not address
failures that originate in the system around the
model.
Adversarial input research [22, 32] demonstrates
that LLM safety training fails under distribution
shift, and that external inputs can override sys-
tem prompts. Greshake et al. [10] introduced
indirect prompt injection, where adversarial in-
structions are embedded in retrieved content pro-
cessed by the model. These contributions map
to a single sub-class (3a) of our CLASS_3 Inte-
gration taxonomy.
Constitutional AI [3] and related alignment work
address the training-time mitigation of one sub-
class (5c) of our Safety & Compliance failures:
policy boundary violations. The broader com-
pliance failure surface — PII leakage, halluci-
nated legal citations, auditability gaps, copyright
reproduction — is not addressed by alignment
training alone.
Evaluation critiques [4, 16, 24, 26] collectively
document the failure of benchmark proxies to
capture real-world model behaviour. HELM
[16] explicitly acknowledges the “evaluation
gap” between benchmark performance and pro-
duction reliability. These contributions map to
our CLASS_4 Evaluation Failures, which we
treat as a system-level failure class in their own
right.
3.3 Recent Work on Silent Deployment Fail-
ures (2025–2026)
Four concurrent papers have begun cataloguing
silent failures in deployed LLM systems. Shen
et al. [28] provide a taxonomy of undetected
deployment failures focused on output-quality
degradation. Kumar et al. [14] analyse measure-
ment gaps in production AI monitoring. Liu et
al. [17] characterise the structural conditions un-
der which deployed LLMs fail invisibly. Pandey
[21] study seven production failure modes in
agentic systems empirically, finding that no stan-
dard metric detects more than two of the seven
failure modes; their empirical data include a case
4

where accuracy remained flat at 0.86–0.88 across
five evaluation windows while output diversity
collapsed by 6.5× — a concrete instantiation
of our formal Definition 1. All four address
deployment-time failures only. None provides a
formal definition of the structural property they
describe, and none addresses training-time eval-
uation blindness. This work both formalises the
shared property and extends its scope to the train-
ing lifecycle.
1
3.4 Training-Time Reward Corruption
Gao et al. [9] provide empirical evidence that
RLHF reward models can be systematically
gamed beyond a KL budget threshold, producing
policies that score highly on the proxy reward
while degrading on human preference evalua-
tions. This work addresses a specific mechanism
(reward hacking) at training time; it does not for-
malise the evaluation blindness property, does
not address implementation-level bugs (as in our
GRPO case study), and does not connect to the
deployment-time failure taxonomy.
3.5 AI Incident Databases
The AI Incident Database [18] provides the most
comprehensive public collection of real-world
AI failures, with over 600 indexed incidents at
the time of writing. The AIAAIC repository
[1] provides a complementary collection with
stronger regulatory context. Both databases col-
lect incidents without providing a structured fail-
ure taxonomy with detectability profiles, formal
failure budget formalism, or lifecycle-spanning
analysis.
3.6 Coverage Gap
Table 1 maps prior work to our six failure classes
and the training-time evaluation blindness con-
tribution. No single prior work covers the full
taxonomy and no prior work connects training-
time and deployment-time measurement failure
under a unified formal framework.
4 Taxonomy Framework
4.1 Design Principles
Four principles guide the taxonomy design.
1
The author of Pandey [21] also served as the indepen-
dent annotator for the inter-rater reliability study reported in
Section 8; this relationship is disclosed in the Acknowledg-
ments.
Layer-specificity..Each failure class maps to
a distinct system layer: model weights and
inference (C1), serving infrastructure (C2),
application–LLM integration (C3), evaluation
and observability (C4), governance and compli-
ance (C5), and operational process (C6). Layer-
specific classification enables routing each fail-
ure to the appropriate owning team rather than
treating all failures as model problems.
Actionability..Each class implies a distinct re-
mediation path. Infrastructure failures require
capacity planning and load-shedding; integration
failures require guardrails and output validators;
operational failures require runbook creation and
monitoring coverage. A taxonomy that cannot
drive remediation produces correct labels but no
operational value.
Detectability as a first-class attribute..We clas-
sify not only what fails but when and how it
becomes observable. Detectability takes three
values: immediate (alert fires within minutes),
delayed (discovered within hours to days), or
silent (discovered only via audit, user complaint,
or manual review, weeks to months later). Our
key empirical finding — that 50% of incidents
are silent — motivates this as a first-class at-
tribute.
Blast radius..Scope of impact is a classifica-
tion attribute, not an afterthought. Blast ra-
dius takes six levels: single_request →
single_user → user_cohort → team
→ org_wide → public
. The same failure
class (e.g. prompt injection) can have very dif-
ferent operational impact depending on whether
it affects one request or all requests from a user
cohort.
4.2 Classification Dimensions
Table 2 summarises the seven classification di-
mensions applied to each labeled incident.
4.3 Relationship to Model-Centric Framing
A surface-level manifestation of “the model re-
turned wrong output” can arise from multiple
distinct root causes in our taxonomy. Halluci-
nation of legal citations (as in Mata v. Avianca)
is a Safety & Compliance failure (C5b) because
the context is a high-stakes domain lacking a
verification guardrail. A model returning out-
dated regulatory information from a stale RAG
index is an Integration failure (C3d). A model
whose output distribution quietly shifted after
5

Table 1. Coverage of failure classes and key contributions across prior work. ✓ = full coverage; ∼ = partial; ✗ =
not addressed. “EB” = formal evaluation blindness definition. “Train” = training-time evaluation blindness.
Work 
C1
Drift
C2
Infra
C3
Integr.
C4
Eval
C5
Safety
C6
Ops
Formal
EB
Train
EB 
/8
Sculley et al. 2015 ∼ ∼ ✗ ✗ ✗ ∼ ✗ ✗ 1.5
Amershi et al. 2019 ∼ ✗ ✗ ∼ ✗ ∼ ✗ ✗ 1.5
Paleyes et al. 2022 ∼ ∼ ✗ ✗ ✗ ∼ ✗ ✗ 1.5
Ji et al. 2023 ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ∼ ✗ ✗ ✗ 1.5
Wei et al. 2023 ✗ ✗ ∼ ✗ ∼ ✗ ✗ ✗ 1.0
Liang et al. 2022 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 1.0
AIID 2021 ∼ ∼ ∼ ✗ ∼ ∼ ✗ ✗ 2.0
Gao et al. 2025 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ∼ 0.5
Shen et al. 2025 ∼ ✗ ∼ ∼ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 1.0
Kumar et al. 2025 ∼ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 1.5
Pandey 2026 ✓ ∼ ∼ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 3.0
This work ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 8.0
Table 2. Taxonomy classification dimensions.
Dimension Type Values
Failure class Enum C1–C6 (see Section 5)
Sub-class Enum 3–5 per class (26 total)
Severity Ordinal critical, high, medium, low
Detectability Ordinal immediate, delayed, silent
Blast radius Ordinal single_request → public
MTTD Numeric Hours (0.1 to >1000)
Failure budget class Enum FC_A, FC_B, FC_C, FC_D
an upstream provider update is a Model Drift
failure (C1a). All three can appear as “the LLM
produced wrong output.” All three require dif-
ferent remediation. The taxonomy makes this
distinction precise.
5 The Six Failure Classes
Table 3 provides a compact overview. Each sub-
section below gives the definition, sub-classes,
key monitoring indicators, detectability profile,
and a representative real-world incident.
5.1 C1 — Model Drift Failures
Definition..Failures caused by a shift in the
LLM’s output distribution that is not caused by
an explicit model weight update visible to the
deploying team. The model “changes” silently
from the operator’s perspective.
Sub-classes..(1a) Upstream provider silent up-
date; (1b) production distribution shift from in-
put distribution drift; (1c) context-window satu-
ration drift, where longer prompts systematically
degrade output quality.
Key indicators..Output token-length distribu-
tion; semantic similarity to baseline outputs;
task-specific quality proxy metrics; downstream
conversion or satisfaction metrics.
Representative incident..In March 2023, de-
velopers using GPT-4 via the OpenAI API re-
ported systematic changes in model behaviour —
including altered instruction-following patterns
and changed coding style — without any an-
nounced model update. The change was detected
via developer forum reports approximately 168
hours after it began. No production monitor-
ing alert fired. This is a canonical C1a incident:
silent upstream update, silent detectability, blast
radius user_cohort.
Detectability profile..Silent to delayed. MTTD
range: 24h to weeks. Error-rate monitoring will
not fire; distributional monitoring is required.
5.2 C2 — Infrastructure Failures
Definition..Failures in the serving stack, load
balancer, GPU allocation, or dependent services,
where the model itself is functioning correctly
but the infrastructure around it fails to deliver
model outputs reliably.
Sub-classes..(2a) P99 latency regression;
(2b) OOM / KV-cache exhaustion; (2c) routing
misclassification under load; (2d) API breaking
change from upstream provider.
Key indicators..Request error rate (4xx/5xx);
P99 and P999 latency; GPU memory utilisation;
queue depth; cold-start frequency.
Representative incident..vLLM’s PagedAtten-
tion memory management system [15] intro-
duced efficient GPU memory handling, but
bursty long-context traffic can exhaust the KV-
cache under concurrent load, producing 500 er-
rors with a stack trace indicating OOM. Detec-
tion is immediate (errors fire within seconds),
6

Table 3. The six failure classes with detectability and blast radius profiles.
Class Name System Layer Detectability Key Indicator
C1 Model Drift Model / Inference Silent →
Delayed
Output distribution
shift; MTTD 24h–168h
C2 Infrastructure Serving Stack Immediate →
Delayed
Latency spike; OOM;
5xx error rate
C3 Integration App–LLM Boundary Delayed →
Silent
Prompt injection; stale
retrieval; context
truncation
C4 Evaluation Observability Silent Metric proxy collapse;
benchmark
contamination
C5 Safety &
Compliance
Governance Delayed →
Silent
PII regex hit;
hallucinated citation;
policy breach
C6 Operational Process & Runbooks Delayed Monitoring blind-spot;
absent runbook;
escalation gap
but remediation requires capacity planning.
Blast radius: user_cohort to org_wide de-
pending on request routing.
Detectability profile..Immediate to delayed.
MTTD range: 0.1h to 8h. Standard error-rate
monitoring is sufficient to detect C2 failures
promptly.
5.3 C3 — Integration Failures
Definition..Failures at the boundary between the
LLM and the application layer, where the model
itself produces output consistent with its training
but the integration layer — prompts, retrieval
pipelines, tool calls, or multi-turn state — is
deficient.
Sub-classes..(3a) Prompt injection / jailbreak;
(3b) context truncation (silent); (3c) tool-call hal-
lucination; (3d) RAG retrieval mismatch (stale
index); (3e) multi-turn state corruption.
Key indicators..System prompt integrity
checks; context window utilisation (flag
truncation at >85% capacity); tool-call success
rate; retrieval freshness timestamp; semantic
consistency across turns.
Representative incident..Bing Chat (Sydney
persona, February 2023) demonstrated C3a: ad-
versarial user inputs extracted the hidden system
prompt and enabled persona escape, causing the
system to produce outputs inconsistent with de-
ployment intent. The failure was in the inte-
gration layer: no output validator verified that
responses were within policy bounds given the
system prompt state.
Detectability profile..Delayed to silent. RAG
staleness failures (3d) are frequently silent for
weeks. Prompt injection (3a) may be detected
via content moderation if guardrails are in place.
5.4 C4 — Evaluation Failures (Deployment-
Time Evaluation Blindness)
Definition..Failures in the evaluation and observ-
ability infrastructure itself, where the measure-
ment system that should detect other failures is
itself broken. In the framework of Section 2,
C4 failures are the deployment-time realisation
of evaluation blindness: the deployed M
deploy
has δ(s, M
deploy
) = 0 not because the failure is
subtle, but because the measurement infrastruc-
ture is structurally absent or misconfigured. C4
failures are meta-failures: they cause the other
five failure classes to go undetected.
Sub-classes..(4a) Metric proxy collapse
(BLEU/ROUGE gaming, LLM-as-judge reward
hacking at deployment time); (4b) evaluation
set contamination (overlapping with production
traffic); (4c) production–evaluation distribution
gap (eval queries do not match production
query distribution); (4d) point accuracy versus
distributional measurement (single-point eval
misses distributional failures visible only at
scale).
Key indicators..Correlation between bench-
mark metrics and user satisfaction scores; evalu-
7

ation set update frequency; fraction of evaluation
traffic overlapping with training data; per-cohort
versus aggregate metric decomposition.
Representative incident..Models evaluated on
HELM [16] or MMLU can achieve bench-
mark improvements through targeted fine-tuning
that degrades real-world user value — a well-
documented form of metric proxy collapse (4a).
This failure class accounts for 10% of our la-
beled incidents, but is the most likely to be under-
reported: C4 failures rarely surface as reportable
incidents because no alert fires and no user com-
plaint is immediately traceable to the evaluation
gap. The structural parallel with training-time
evaluation blindness (Section 6) is exact: in both
cases, the measurement function M operates
normally while reporting values consistent with
a non-failing state.
Detectability profile..Silent. MTTD: months
(δ = 0 under standard monitoring). Requires
dedicated evaluation infrastructure with produc-
tion traffic sampling, regular benchmark rotation,
and per-cohort metric decomposition.
5.5 C5 — Safety & Compliance Failures
Definition..Failures where model outputs violate
regulatory requirements, internal safety policies,
or data governance rules, with the defining prop-
erty that the failure creates legal, reputational, or
harm risk beyond the immediate user.
Sub-classes..(5a) PII leakage (training memo-
risation or prompt reconstruction); (5b) hallu-
cinated legal or medical citations; (5c) policy
boundary violation; (5d) auditability gap (no log
of model decision); (5e) copyright reproduction.
Key indicators..PII regex detector on outputs;
citation verification pipeline; output policy clas-
sifier; audit log completeness; copyright similar-
ity detector.
Representative incident..Mata v. Avianca [31]
is the canonical C5b incident. The failure was
not that the model was capable of fabricating le-
gal citations — that is a known model-layer prop-
erty. The failure was the absence of a verification
layer between model output and consequential
action: the attorney submitted the output without
cross-referencing against a legal database. In a
properly designed system for a Decision-Critical
(FC_A) use case, every legal citation generated
by an LLM should be verified against a live legal
database before submission. The system design
failed; the model behaved as models do.
Detectability profile..Delayed to silent. PII leak-
age (5a) may fire immediately if output moni-
toring is in place; hallucinated citations (5b) are
silent until downstream action reveals the error.
5.6 C6 — Operational Failures
Definition..Failures in the operational processes,
runbooks, monitoring coverage, and escalation
paths around the LLM system. The model and
infrastructure may be functioning correctly; the
operational envelope has failed.
Sub-classes..(6a) Monitoring blind-spot (no
alert configured for a failure mode); (6b) run-
book absence (no documented response when
a known failure occurs); (6c) escalation break-
down (alert fires but reaches wrong team or no
team); (6d) canary / shadow test gap (no pre-
production testing of distribution changes).
Key indicators..Alert coverage matrix against
taxonomy classes; runbook inventory and last-
reviewed date; mean time to escalation versus
SLO; shadow traffic coverage fraction.
Representative incident..A composite pattern
drawn from multiple enterprise deployments: an
LLM output pipeline begins producing longer
responses, consuming more downstream storage
and increasing user-visible latency. No alert ex-
ists for output-length distribution shift; the team
detects the change via a support ticket backlog
review three weeks later. The model produced
valid outputs throughout. The operational enve-
lope — specifically, the absence of output distri-
bution monitoring — was the failure.
Detectability profile..Delayed. C6 failures typi-
cally surface via indirect signals (support back-
log, quarterly review, downstream system alerts)
rather than direct monitoring.
6 Training-Time Evaluation Blind-
ness
Training-time evaluation blindness occurs when
the measurement set available during model
training (M
train 
= {loss, reward, benchmark
score}) fails to detect that the training process
is producing a corrupted policy. The failure
is structurally identical to deployment-time C4
Evaluation failures: the observability infrastruc-
ture reports normal operation while the system
degrades.
8

We present four instances spanning gradient
computation, reward modelling, data contam-
ination, and policy collapse. Case Study 1 is
an original analysis of a verifiable implemen-
tation bug in a widely-used open-source library
(TRL PR #6594), including a formal statement
of the gradient corruption and its evaluation-
blindness properties. Case Studies 2–4 ap-
ply the evaluation blindness framework to
well-documented phenomena in the literature
[9, 19, 29], demonstrating that each constitutes
a structural instance of Definition 1 — a finding
not made in the original papers. In all four cases,
the standard training measurement set M
train
satisfies δ(s, M
train
) = 0 for the duration of the
corrupted training run.
6.1 Case Study 1: GRPO Importance-
Sampling Ratio Bug (TRL PR #6594)
Group Relative Policy Optimisation (GRPO)
[27] is a reinforcement learning variant that re-
places the critic network in PPO with a group-
normalised reward signal, making it attractive
for LLM fine-tuning at scale. The Hugging Face
TRL library provides the reference open-source
implementation used by a large fraction of the
research community.
The bug..In the GRPO implementation, KL di-
vergence between the current policy π
θ 
and refer-
ence policy π
ref 
is corrected using an importance-
sampling (IS) ratio. The IS ratio should be com-
puted per-token:
r
t 
= 
π
θ 
(a
t
|s
t
)
π
ref
(a
t
|s
t
)
Under the option
importance_sampling_level="sequence",
a miscalculation replaced the per-token ratio
with the sequence-level mean ¯r = 
1
T
P
T
t=1 
r
t
when applying the bias correction to the
KL term. This silently changes the gradient
landscape: the sequence-mean IS ratio is a
different quantity that introduces systematic bias
in the KL correction, particularly for sequences
with high token-level ratio variance [12].
The evaluation blindness..No training-time
measurement flagged the corruption. Training
loss decreased normally. Reward curves showed
the expected improvement trajectory. Bench-
mark evaluations on held-out tasks showed plau-
sible scores. The error was discovered not by
any automated measurement but by a contribu-
tor cross-referencing the TRL implementation
against the DeepSeek-V3 technical specification,
which provides the ground-truth per-token IS
ratio formula. This is a canonical training-time
evaluation blindness event: δ(s, M
train
) = 0 for
the entire duration of affected runs.
Affected scope..Any GRPO
training run using TRL with
importance_sampling_level="sequence"
before the fix would have trained with corrupted
KL gradients. The number of affected runs
in the research community is unknown; the
training curves of affected runs would show no
anomaly.
6.2 Case Study 2: Reward Hacking in RLHF
The reward model in RLHF [19] is a proxy for
human preference. Goodhart’s Law [25] pre-
dicts that a measure used as a target ceases to
be a good measure; in RLHF, this manifests as
the policy learning to exploit idiosyncrasies of
the reward model’s decision surface rather than
maximising genuine quality.
The evaluation blindness..Reward hacking is
training-blind by construction. The reward in-
creases — that is what the policy is optimis-
ing. KL divergence from the reference policy
remains within the configured bound. The policy
is doing exactly what the training objective spec-
ifies. The failure is in the measurement function:
the reward model is not the quantity we care
about, but it is the only measurement function in
M
train
.
Gao et al. [9] provide empirical evidence that
beyond a certain KL budget, policy quality (mea-
sured by gold-label human preference) decreases
while proxy reward continues to increase. The
reward curve and KL curve together — the stan-
dard training dashboard — provide no signal of
this degradation. The failure is invisible until
a separate, out-of-loop gold evaluation is run.
In production training pipelines, this evaluation
is frequently omitted or run only at final check-
point, creating a window of deployment blind-
ness following each RLHF stage.
6.3 Case Study 3: Benchmark Contamina-
tion in Fine-Tuning
When a language model is fine-tuned on a
dataset that overlaps with its benchmark eval-
uation set — whether through deliberate contam-
ination or inadvertent data pipeline leakage —
evaluation scores are inflated without reflecting
genuine capability improvement [29].
9

The evaluation blindness..Fine-tuning loss de-
creases. Benchmark accuracy improves. No
gradient anomaly appears. The contamination
is invisible to every measurement in M
train 
be-
cause better benchmark performance is indis-
tinguishable from legitimate capability gain by
any metric available within the standard train-
ing measurement set. Detection requires a mea-
surement outside M
train
: membership inference
[29], withheld benchmark variants, or canary
evaluation sets constructed after training data
collection.
The practical consequence is severe for foun-
dation model evaluation and for fine-tuning
pipelines that curate training data from the web:
a contaminated model presents as better than it
is, and downstream deployment decisions based
on the inflated scores embed the evaluation blind-
ness into production.
6.4 Case Study 4: Mode Collapse in Policy
Optimisation
Reinforcement learning applied to language
model fine-tuning can produce mode collapse:
the policy converges to a low-entropy distribu-
tion over a small region of the output space that
scores well on the reward signal while losing
diversity and generalisation.
The evaluation blindness..Reward improves.
KL divergence stabilises. Individual outputs
score highly on task-specific evaluation met-
rics. The mode collapse is not visible to any
per-output quality metric because the collapsed
outputs are high-quality on the measured dimen-
sions. The failure manifests only in distribu-
tional properties — output diversity, task cover-
age, robustness under paraphrase — that are not
part of the standard training measurement set.
LLM-as-judge evaluation [33] can partially sur-
face mode collapse if the judge is prompted to
assess diversity, but this requires an explicit dis-
tributional measurement design, which is absent
from most standard RLHF training loops.
6.5 The Common Structure Across All Four
Cases
Table 4 summarises the four cases. In every in-
stance, the measurements available during train-
ing (M
train
) produce values that are distribu-
tional consistent with a healthy training run. The
failures have three properties in common: (1)
they are not detectable by loss or reward metrics
alone; (2) they require either a measurement out-
Table 4. Training-time evaluation blindness: four case
studies. All four are invisible to standard training mea-
surement sets (M
train 
= {loss, reward, benchmark}).
Case Root Cause Visible Metric Detection Requires
GRPO IS ratio bug Incorrect per-token IS
ratio in KL correction
Loss ↓, reward ↑,
benchmark stable
Spec comparison or
per-token ratio audit
RLHF reward hacking Proxy reward
optimisation diverges
from human pref
Reward ↑, KL within
bound
Gold-label human
preference evaluation
Benchmark contamination Eval set overlap with
training data
Benchmark accuracy
↑
Membership inference
or held-out canary set
Mode collapse Policy entropy
collapse under RL
fine-tuning
Reward ↑, per-output
quality high
Output diversity /
distributional probe
side the standard training loop (gold preference
eval, membership inference, diversity probe) or
comparison against a specification (ground-truth
IS formula); and (3) the errors propagate into the
trained model silently, producing downstream
deployment failures that appear to originate in
the model rather than in the training process.
7 Failure Budget Framework
7.1 Why Per-Model Accuracy Is the Wrong
Unit
The dominant practice for LLM deployment de-
cisions is to select a model based on its score on
one or more benchmarks: “Model A achieves
87.3 on MMLU, Model B achieves 84.1; there-
fore use Model A.” This framing has two prob-
lems.
First, benchmark scores aggregate performance
across thousands of tasks, many of which are
irrelevant to the deploying team’s use case. A fi-
nancial services firm deploying a credit decision-
ing assistant cares about accuracy on regulatory
language understanding, not astronomy multiple
choice.
Second, and more importantly, two use cases
running on the same model can have radically
different acceptable failure tolerances. A credit
decisioning pipeline and an internal search assis-
tant are not equivalent from a risk perspective.
They should not share a failure budget.
7.2 Formal Definition
We define the failure budget B(u) for use case
u as the maximum acceptable weighted failure
count per 1,000 requests:
B(u) = ρ

risk_class(u)
 
(1)
where ρ : {FC_A, FC_B, FC_C, FC_D} →
R
>0 
maps each risk class to its maximum fail-
ure rate (see Table 5). Failures are weighted
by severity before counting: w(critical) = 3,
w(high) = 2, w(medium) = 1, w(low) = 0.5.
10

Table 5. Failure budget risk classes, with calibration
drawn from regulated deployment practice [6–8].
Class Name 
Max Rate
(per 1k) 
Example Use Cases
FC_A Decision-Critical 1.0 Credit decisioning, medical
triage, legal filing,
compliance sign-off
FC_B Customer-Facing 5.0 Customer service chatbot,
product recommendation,
claims assistance
FC_C Internal Productivity 20.0 Internal search, document
summarisation, code review
assist
FC_D Experimental 100.0 R&D prototypes, sandbox
evaluations, research
assistants
Budget utilisation at time t:
U (u, t) =
P
e∈E(u,t) 
w(e.sev.)
N (u, t)/1,000 
· 
100%
B(u) 
(2)
where E(u, t) is the set of failure events ob-
served for use case u up to time t, and N (u, t) is
the total request count. Status thresholds: <50%
= HEALTHY; 50–80% = ELEVATED; 80–100%
= WARNING; >100% = BREACHED.
7.3 Risk Class Calibration
Risk class boundaries are calibrated against reg-
ulated deployment practice. FC_A corresponds
to use cases regulated under the EU AI Act’s
high-risk category [7], where a 0.1% undetected
failure rate is consistent with Basel model risk
management requirements for material model
risk [6] and the FCA’s Consumer Duty thresh-
old for customer harm [8]. FC_D corresponds
to experimental systems where failures have no
consequential downstream action and produce
no harm to external parties.
7.4 Implementation
Budget class assignment must precede model se-
lection: it is a business and legal decision, not a
technical one. The question “what is acceptable
failure tolerance for this workflow?” requires
input from legal, compliance, product, and ML
teams jointly. Teams that assign FC_A to a use
case after this review must then ensure their mon-
itoring, guardrail, and evaluation coverage is suf-
ficient to detect failures at the 0.1% level — a
requirement that substantially constrains the de-
ployment architecture.
A reference implementation is avail-
able at https://github.com/
priyanka25aug/llm-failure-
taxonomy/blob/main/src/failure_
budget/calculator.py.
Table 6. Failure budget utilisation example. One
critical C5 and one high C3 on a Decision-Critical use
case puts it in WARNING status.
Use Case Risk Budget 
Weighted
Failures 
Util. Status
Credit Decisioning FC_A 1.0 5.0 50% WARNING
Customer Chatbot FC_B 5.0 4.0 0.16% HEALTHY
Internal Search FC_C 20.0 0.0 0% HEALTHY
7.5 Illustrative Example
Consider a financial services firm operating three
LLM use cases: a credit decisioning assistant
(FC_A, 100,000 requests/month), a customer
chatbot (FC_B, 500,000 requests/month), and
an internal knowledge search (FC_C, 50,000
requests/month). In a given month, the following
failures are observed: one critical C5 failure and
one high C3 failure on the credit use case; two
high C3 failures on the chatbot. Table 6 shows
the budget utilisation report.
The credit decisioning use case is in WARNING
status despite having only two observable fail-
ures, because the severity weighting (critical =
3×, high = 2×) amplifies risk-appropriate con-
cern. The chatbot, with more absolute failures
but lower risk class and higher request volume,
is HEALTHY.
8 Dataset and Validation
8.1 Dataset Construction
We constructed a labeled dataset of 50 pro-
duction LLM failure incidents. Thirty-six
incidents are sourced from verifiable public
records; 14 are synthetic composites constructed
from anonymised enterprise failure patterns and
clearly marked as such. Public sources include:
court documents (Mata v. Avianca, NYT v. Ope-
nAI, DoNotPay FTC consent order, UK Post
Office Horizon Inquiry); regulatory filings (FCA
Consumer Duty thematic review, GDPR enforce-
ment actions, NHS AI triage bias investigation);
academic papers documenting real system fail-
ures; published company postmortems (OpenAI
ChatGPT outage, cross-user data exposure in-
cident); and credible technology press (BBC,
Reuters, Bloomberg, Wired).
Each incident is labeled with all seven classifica-
tion dimensions from Section 4. Labeling was
performed by the first author.
Inter-Rater Reliability
To validate that the class definitions are clear
and consistently applicable by domain experts
11

other than the author, we conducted an indepen-
dent annotation study. A Staff ML Engineer at
Meta with deep experience in LLM evaluation
infrastructure labeled a stratified sample of 20
incidents (drawn to cover all five classes repre-
sented by real incidents) without access to the
author’s labels. The annotator received only the
six class definitions and incident descriptions —
no examples, no pre-labeled items, and no dis-
cussion of the author’s labeling choices prior to
submission.
The annotator and the author agreed on all 20
incidents (20/20), yielding Cohen’s κ = 1.00
(chance-corrected; P
observed 
= 1.00, P
expected 
=
0.21
). The perfect agreement is notable given
that the annotator independently identified four
structurally ambiguous cases and still reached
the same classification:
• Incidents 04, 19 (hallucinated legal ad-
vice/citations): the mechanism is C1
(model hallucination) but the production
consequence is C5 (legal liability). Both
annotators labeled by consequence.
• Incident 11 (Waymo edge-lighting error):
borderline C1/C4; both labeled C4 be-
cause the evaluation set coverage gap was
the named cause.
• Incident 03 (Alexa latency regression):
borderline C2/C6 (11-day rollback time
suggests a monitoring gap); both labeled
C2 as the serving layer was the primary
failure.
The annotator’s confidence was High on 17 of
20 items and Medium on 3 (Incidents 03, 04, 11
— the same boundary cases listed above). The
convergence of independent reasoning to iden-
tical labels, even at class boundaries, provides
strong evidence that the six-class taxonomy is
unambiguous enough to support consistent ex-
pert application. The annotator is also the author
of Pandey [21]; this relationship is disclosed in
the Acknowledgments.
The full dataset and source citations are
available at https://github.com/
priyanka25aug/llm-failure-
taxonomy/tree/main/data.
8.2 Dataset Statistics
Table 7 summarises the dataset.
The most salient finding is the silent majority:
19 of 36 verifiable public incidents (53%) have
Table 7. Dataset statistics by failure class. “Real” =
verifiable public sources (N=36); “Synth” = synthetic
composites (N=14), included for class coverage only
and excluded from all empirical frequency claims.
C6 is represented entirely by synthetic composites;
no publicly reportable C6-only incident reached the
documentation threshold used for real incidents.
Class 
Real
N
Synth
N
Total
N
Crit/High
(real)
Silent%
(real)
Median
MTTD (h)
C5 Safety & Compliance 13 0 13 92% 62% 72
C3 Integration 10 3 13 85% 40% 48
C2 Infrastructure 4 3 7 71% 0% 2
C1 Model Drift 4 2 6 67% 50% 120
C4 Evaluation 5 0 5 60% 100% 720
C6 Operational 0 6 6 — — —
Real total 36 — — 81% 53% 72
All (incl. synth) — — 50 — 52% —
a detectability classification of silent, meaning
no monitoring alert fired and the incident was
discovered via audit, manual review, or user com-
plaint. The finding is robust: including the 14
synthetic composites yields 52% silent across all
50 incidents, confirming that synthetic construc-
tion did not bias the detectability distribution.
This finding is not an artefact of source bias
toward dramatic incidents: real infrastructure
failures (C2) — the most easily detectable class
— are all immediate or delayed among verifiable
sources, consistent with the expectation that they
fire standard error-rate alerts. Silent failures are
concentrated in C4 (100% of 5 real incidents),
C5 (62% of 13), and C1 (50% of 4).
Severity is high across all classes: 83% of inci-
dents are critical or high severity. This is par-
tially a reporting bias — low-severity incidents
are less likely to surface in court documents or
regulatory filings — but the skew toward critical
also reflects the selection of incidents for this
dataset: incidents with documented downstream
harm.
Figure 2 shows the mean time to detection
by class on a log scale, demonstrating the
six-orders-of-magnitude difference between C2
(MTTD: minutes to hours) and C4 (MTTD:
months).
8.3 Classifier Validation
We implemented a rule-based classifier us-
ing a weighted keyword signal architecture:
each failure class is associated with a set
of (pattern, weight) tuples; scoring across all
classes yields a confidence distribution; the
highest-scoring class is returned with an expla-
nation. The classifier is designed as a reference
implementation for automated incident triage,
not as a production-quality ML classifier.
12

(a) Failure class distribution across 50 incidents. (b) Detectability profile by failure class.
Figure 1. Incident distribution (left) and detectability profile (right). Safety & Compliance and Integration each
account for 26% of incidents. 53% of 36 verifiable public incidents are silent — the core finding motivating
distributional monitoring as a first-class engineering concern.
Figure 2. Mean Time to Detection (MTTD) by failure class, log scale. Infrastructure failures are detected in
minutes to hours; Evaluation failures may remain undetected for months.
Table 8 reports precision and recall on the 50
labeled incidents. The pattern set achieves 98%
label consistency (49/50): for 49 of 50 inci-
dents, the independently-implemented pattern
set assigns the same class as the author-assigned
ground-truth label. This is a consistency result,
not a generalisation claim — the classifier is rule-
based and the patterns were developed against
this incident set. Its purpose is to confirm that
the taxonomy’s distinguishing signals are opera-
tionalisable in natural language descriptions, and
that the class boundaries are sufficiently sharp to
support automated triage. Incident descriptions
and titles are the only inputs; no held-out test set
exists at this dataset scale.
The one remaining misclassification (FTX-0050)
is a tool-call hallucination incident in a financial
agentic workflow that contains language activat-
ing both C1 (output quality degradation) and C3
(tool-call failure) signals; the C1 pattern scores
slightly higher due to the financial domain key-
words. This C1/C3 ambiguity arises because
Table 8. Rule-based classifier precision and recall per
class (evaluated on all 50 labeled incidents).
Class N P R F1
C1 Model Drift 6 0.86 1.00 0.92
C2 Infrastructure 7 1.00 1.00 1.00
C3 Integration 13 1.00 0.92 0.96
C4 Evaluation 5 1.00 1.00 1.00
C5 Safety & Compliance 13 1.00 1.00 1.00
C6 Operational 6 1.00 1.00 1.00
Macro avg 50 0.98 0.99 0.98
tool-call hallucinations in financial contexts of-
ten co-occur with output distribution descrip-
tions. A production classifier should use domain
context as a tiebreaker.
8.4 Limitations
The dataset is skewed toward publicly reported
incidents. Incidents reaching court documents
and regulatory filings are by definition severe;
low-severity failures are substantially under-
represented. This skew affects the severity dis-
13

tribution (high/critical over-represented) and the
domain distribution (financial services and legal
domains over-represented relative to consumer
internet deployments). Single-annotator label-
ing introduces reliability risk; an inter-rater re-
liability study was conducted (Section 8.1) and
yielded κ = 1.00 on a stratified 20-incident sam-
ple. Synthetic incidents are included to provide
coverage of failure classes with few public ex-
amples (notably C4 and C6), but are not used in
any empirical frequency claims.
9 Discussion
9.1 Evaluation Blindness as a Unified Engi-
neering Problem
The formal definition in Section 2 and the case
studies in Section 6 together establish that eval-
uation blindness is not a property of a specific
failure class or lifecycle stage — it is a structural
property of measurement systems that can ap-
pear whenever M is insufficient to distinguish a
failing state from a non-failing state.
The practical consequence is that the question “is
the measurement infrastructure adequate?” must
be asked at every stage of the AI system lifecy-
cle:
• 
At training time: Is the reward model a
faithful proxy? Is the IS ratio implemen-
tation correct? Does the evaluation set
contaminate the training data? Is output
diversity being measured?
• At evaluation time: Does the bench-
mark match the production query distri-
bution? Is the LLM-as-judge scorer cal-
ibrated against human preference? Are
per-cohort metrics computed alongside ag-
gregates?
• At deployment time: Does the monitor-
ing set M cover all six failure classes
in Table 3? Is distributional monitoring
present alongside error-rate monitoring?
Are citation outputs verified for FC_A use
cases?
Teams that invest heavily in model capability
while treating measurement infrastructure as sec-
ondary will observe evaluation blindness at every
stage. The failure budget framework in Section 7
is a mechanism for making the measurement re-
quirements explicit and auditable: FC_A use
cases must be able to detect failures at the 10
−3
level, which defines the minimum M required.
Table 9. Recommended monitoring primitives per
failure class.
Class Monitoring Primitive
C1 Drift Output distribution shift; semantic
drift score; A/B to baseline
C2 Infrastructure Error rate; P99 latency; GPU
memory utilisation; queue depth
C3 Integration System prompt integrity; context
window utilisation; retrieval
freshness; tool-call success rate
C4 Evaluation Benchmark–production correlation;
evaluation set contamination check;
per-cohort metric decomposition
C5 Safety PII regex on outputs; citation
verification; policy classifier; audit
log completeness
C6 Operational Alert coverage matrix; runbook
inventory; escalation path test
9.2 The Silent Majority and Its Architectural
Implication
The central empirical finding of this work —
53% of verifiable public incidents are silent —
has a direct consequence for monitoring archi-
tecture. Standard production monitoring for soft-
ware systems relies on error-rate thresholds, la-
tency percentiles, and availability probes. All
three measure presence or absence of response,
not quality or distributional properties of the re-
sponse. An LLM system can pass all three stan-
dard monitoring criteria while simultaneously
producing outputs that are systematically wrong
for a user cohort (C1b), returning stale retrieval
results (C3d), or operating with a broken evalua-
tion pipeline that cannot detect either (C4c).
Production LLM monitoring must extend to dis-
tributional monitoring: output token-length dis-
tribution, semantic similarity to baseline outputs,
task-specific quality proxy metrics, and retrieval
freshness timestamps. The six failure classes in
this taxonomy map to distinct monitoring primi-
tives; Table 9 provides a mapping.
9.3 Safety & Compliance Is Not a Model
Problem
C5 is the co-dominant failure class at 26% of in-
cidents, but its sub-classes span the full spectrum
from model behaviour (5a: PII memorisation)
to system design (5b: absent citation verifica-
tion) to governance (5d: auditability gap). The
shared property is not model behaviour; it is the
absence of a verification layer between model
output and consequential action. No amount of
alignment training eliminates the need for verifi-
cation layers in FC_A use cases: even a model
14

that hallucinates citations at a rate of 0.1% —
well within current state-of-the-art — will pro-
duce a legal error every 1,000 requests without
verification. The taxonomy enables targeted re-
mediation: each C5 sub-class implies a distinct
control.
9.4 Evaluation Failure Is Underreported
C4 accounts for only 10% of incidents in our
dataset — the lowest share — but we believe
this is a substantial undercount. Evaluation fail-
ures are meta-failures: they are the failure of
the signal that would catch other failures. They
rarely surface as reportable incidents. No court
document records an LLM evaluation pipeline
failing to detect benchmark contamination. No
regulatory filing identifies metric proxy collapse
as the cause of customer harm. But both fail-
ure modes degrade the system’s ability to de-
tect and respond to the other five failure classes.
Dedicated evaluation infrastructure — with pro-
duction traffic sampling, regular benchmark ro-
tation, and per-cohort metric decomposition —
is a first-class engineering concern, not an aca-
demic exercise.
9.5 Failure Budget as Organisational Design
Tool
The failure budget framework is not only a mon-
itoring concept; it is a forcing function for cross-
functional alignment. Assigning a use case to
FC_A requires legal, compliance, ML engineer-
ing, and product teams to agree on acceptable
risk before a single model is selected. This con-
versation — “what failure rate can we accept
for this workflow, and what are the operational
consequences of a breach?” — rarely happens
in practice. Teams instead negotiate model accu-
racy on a benchmark proxy, which answers a dif-
ferent question. The formal budget framework
makes the right question legible and auditable.
Under DORA [6] and the EU AI Act [7], regu-
lated entities are required to document and test
the resilience of critical information infrastruc-
ture. A failure budget framework provides the
structured basis for that documentation.
10 Conclusion
We introduced evaluation blindness as the uni-
fying structural property of AI system failures
that produce no error signal — failures where
the measurement function M returns values con-
sistent with a non-failing state while the system
degrades. This property manifests at training
time (reward hacking, IS ratio miscalculation,
benchmark contamination, mode collapse) and
at deployment time (the C4 Evaluation failure
class, and the 53% of verifiable public incidents
in our dataset that are silent).
Treating training-time and deployment-time
measurement failure as the same problem has a
concrete engineering implication: the question
“is the measurement infrastructure adequate?”
must be asked at training, evaluation, and de-
ployment time, and the answer must be tied to
the acceptable failure rate for the use case (the
failure budget framework of Section 7). A model
trained on corrupted gradients and deployed
through an under-instrumented pipeline is dou-
bly evaluation-blind; the failures compound.
We validated the deployment-time taxonomy
against 50 real-world production incidents from
verifiable public sources, finding that Safety &
Compliance and Integration failures dominate
the publicly reportable record, and that 53% of
verifiable public incidents are invisible to stan-
dard monitoring. We documented four training-
time evaluation blindness instances, including a
verifiable implementation bug (TRL PR #6594)
that corrupted GRPO training runs while produc-
ing plausible loss curves.
Open problems: expansion of the labeled inci-
dent dataset with additional annotators beyond
the initial IRR study; an LLM-based triage clas-
sifier to complement the rule-based implementa-
tion; domain-specific failure budget calibration
for healthcare and critical infrastructure beyond
financial services; temporal analysis of whether
failure patterns are shifting as regulatory frame-
works (EU AI Act, DORA) come into force; and
extension of the formal definition to multi-agent
and agentic system architectures where measure-
ment infrastructure is itself distributed.
All data, code, the taxonomy schema,
the classifier, and the failure budget
calculator are released at: https:
//github.com/priyanka25aug/llm-
failure-taxonomy.
References
[1] AIAAIC.
 AI, algorithmic, and automa-
tion incidents and controversies (AIAAIC).
https://www.aiaaic.org/, 2023.
[2] S. Amershi, A. Begel, C. Bird, R. DeLine,
H. Gall, E. Kamar, N. Nagappan, B. Nushi,
15

and T. Zimmermann. Software engineer-
ing for machine learning: A case study. In
Proceedings of the 41st International Con-
ference on Software Engineering: Software
Engineering in Practice, pages 291–300.
IEEE Press, 2019.
[3] Y. Bai, A. Jones, K. Ndousse, A. Askell,
A. Chen, N. DasSarma, D. Drain, S. Fort,
D. Ganguli, T. Henighan, et al. Constitu-
tional AI: Harmlessness from AI feedback.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
[4] S. R. Bowman and G. E. Dahl. What will
it take to fix benchmarking in natural lan-
guage understanding? In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT, pages 1843–1855, 2021.
[5] British Columbia Civil Resolution Tri-
bunal. Air canada chatbot liable for misin-
formation on bereavement fares. Tribunal
Decision No. SC-2023-005226, 2024.
[6] European Parliament and Council.
 Reg-
ulation (EU) 2022/2554 on digital oper-
ational resilience for the financial sector
(DORA). Official Journal of the European
Union, 2022.
[7] European Parliament and Council. Reg-
ulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the european
parliament and of the council laying down
harmonised rules on artificial intelligence
(Artificial Intelligence Act). Official Jour-
nal of the European Union, 2024.
[8] Financial Conduct Authority. Artificial in-
telligence in financial services: Review of
firms’ approaches to consumer duty com-
pliance. FCA Thematic Review TR24/1,
2024.
[9] L. Gao, S. Biderman, S. Black, L. Gold-
ing, T. Hoppe, C. Foster, J. Phang, H. He,
A. Thite, N. Nabeshima, et al. Reward
hacking in RLHF: Silent corruption of pol-
icy training through proxy optimisation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.03238, 2025.
[10] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra,
C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz. Not what
you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-
world LLM-integrated applications with
indirect prompt injection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.12173, 2023.
[11] L. Huang, W. Yu, W. Ma, W. Zhong,
Z. Feng, H. Wang, Q. Chen, W. Peng,
X. Feng, B. Qin, and T. Liu. A sur-
vey on hallucination in large language
models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges,
and open questions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.05232, 2023.
[12] Hugging Face TRL Contributors. Fix
GRPO importance sampling ratio: Replace
per-token with sequence-mean in KL
bias correction (PR #6594). GitHub
Pull Request, https://github.com/
huggingface/trl/pull/6594
,
2024.
[13] Z. Ji, N. Lee, R. Frieske, T. Yu, D. Su,
Y. Xu, E. Ishii, Y. J. Bang, A. Madotto, and
P. Fung. Survey of hallucination in natu-
ral language generation. ACM Computing
Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023.
[14] A. Kumar, N. Patel, M. Rodriguez, and
J. Thompson. Measurement gaps in pro-
duction AI: When evaluation frameworks
fail to detect system degradation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2607.09999, 2025.
[15] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng,
L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. E. Gonzalez,
H. Zhang, and I. Stoica. Efficient mem-
ory management for large language model
serving with PagedAttention, 2023.
[16] P. Liang, R. Bommasani, T. Lee,
D. Tsipras, D. Soylu, M. Yasunaga,
Y. Zhang, D. Narayanan, Y. Wu, A. Kumar,
et al. Holistic evaluation of language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09110,
2022.
[17] X. Liu, H. Chen, M. Yang, and J. Zhou.
The blind spot problem: Characteris-
ing undetectable failures in deployed lan-
guage model systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2606.09863, 2025.
[18] S. McGregor. Preventing repeated real
world AI failures by cataloging incidents:
The AI incident database. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Workshop on Investigating and
Preventing AI Safety Concerns, 2021.
[19] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida,
C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang,
S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray, et al. Train-
ing language models to follow instructions
with human feedback. Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems, 35:
27730–27744, 2022.
[20] A. Paleyes, R.-G. Urma, and N. D.
Lawrence. Challenges in deploying ma-
chine learning: A survey of case stud-
ies. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(6):1–29,
2022.
16

[21] M. Pandey. Evaluating agentic AI in the
wild: Failure modes, drift patterns, and
a production evaluation framework, May
2026. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2605.01604.
[22] F. Perez and I. Ribeiro. Ignore previous
prompt: Attack techniques for language
models. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Trustworthy NLP (TrustNLP), 2022.
[23] Post Office Horizon IT Inquiry.
Post office Horizon IT inquiry: In-
terim report. https://www.
postofficehorizoninquiry.
org.uk/, 2024.
[24] M. T. Ribeiro, T. Wu, C. Guestrin, and
S. Singh. CheckList: Beyond accuracy:
Behavioral testing of NLP models with
CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 4902–4912,
2020.
[25] D. Sculley, G. Holt, D. Golovin, E. Davy-
dov, T. Phillips, D. Ebner, V. Chaudhary,
M. Young, J.-F. Crespo, and D. Dennison.
Hidden technical debt in machine learning
systems. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, volume 28, 2015.
[26] S. Shankar, Y. Halpern, E. Breck, J. At-
wood, J. Wilson, and D. Sculley. Evaluat-
ing machine learning systems with miss-
ing, noisy, and biased data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.05051, 2020.
[27] Z. Shao, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Xu, J. Song,
X. Bi, H. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. K. Li,
Y. Wu, et al. DeepSeekMath: Pushing
the limits of mathematical reasoning in
open language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
[28] Y. Shen, J. Wang, L. Zhang, and W. Chen.
Silent failures in production LLM systems:
A taxonomy of undetected deployment fail-
ures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.14589,
2025.
[29] W. Shi, A. Ajith, M. Xia, Y. Huang,
D. Liu, T. Blevins, D. Chen, and L. Zettle-
moyer. Detecting pretraining data from
large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.16789, 2024.
[30] N. Stiennon, L. Ouyang, J. Wu, D. M.
Ziegler, R. Lowe, C. Voss, A. Radford,
D. Amodei, and P. F. Christiano. Learning
to summarise with human feedback. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020.
[31] United States District Court, S.D.N.Y.
Mata v. Avianca, Inc., no. 22-cv-1461
(pkc). Sanctions Opinion, June 2023, 2023.
[32] A. Wei, N. Haghtalab, and J. Steinhardt.
Jailbroken: How does LLM safety training
fail? arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02483,
2023.
[33] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng,
S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li,
D. Li, E. P. Xing, et al. Judging LLM-as-
a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena.
Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 36, 2024.
17

A Full Taxonomy Schema
The complete taxonomy definition, including all sub-classes, key indicators, detectability
profiles, and failure budget applicability, is maintained as a machine-readable YAML file
at https://github.com/priyanka25aug/llm-failure-taxonomy/blob/main/
taxonomy/taxonomy.yaml
. A JSON Schema for labeling incident records is provided
at https://github.com/priyanka25aug/llm-failure-taxonomy/blob/main/
taxonomy/schema.json.
Table 10 reproduces the sub-class definitions.
Table 10. Complete taxonomy sub-class reference.
Class Sub Definition Key Indicator
C1 Drift
1a Upstream provider silent model update Output distribution shift
1b Production input distribution drift Semantic drift score
1c Context window saturation drift Avg. context utilisation >85%
C2 Infra
2a P99 latency regression Latency SLO breach
2b OOM / KV-cache exhaustion GPU memory >95%; 5xx rate
2c Routing misclassification under load Wrong model serving traffic
2d API breaking change Response schema mismatch
C3 Integration
3a Prompt injection / jailbreak System prompt integrity check
3b Context truncation (silent) Context utilisation >90%
3c Tool-call hallucination Tool-call success rate
3d RAG retrieval mismatch (stale index) Retrieval freshness timestamp
3e Multi-turn state corruption Per-session coherence score
C4 Evaluation
4a Metric proxy collapse / benchmark gaming Benchmark–production gap
4b Evaluation set contamination Training/eval overlap rate
4c Production–evaluation distribution gap Covariate shift score
4d Point accuracy vs. distributional Per-cohort metric decomposition
C5 Safety
5a PII leakage / memorisation PII regex on outputs
5b Hallucinated legal/medical citations Citation verification pipeline
5c Policy boundary violation Output policy classifier
5d Auditability gap Audit log completeness
5e Copyright reproduction Similarity to training corpus
C6 Operational
6a Monitoring blind-spot Alert coverage matrix
6b Runbook absence Runbook inventory
6c Escalation breakdown Time to escalation vs. SLO
6d Canary / shadow test gap Shadow traffic coverage
18

B Dataset Sample
Table 11 provides two representative incidents per failure class. Full 50-incident dataset with
source URLs at https://github.com/priyanka25aug/llm-failure-taxonomy/
blob/main/data/public_incidents/incidents.csv.
Table 11. Representative incident sample (2 per class).
ID Class Incident Sev. Detect. MTTD
FTX-0001 C1a GPT-4 silent behaviour change
(Mar 2023)
High Silent 168h
FTX-0002 C1b Production query distribution shift
post-launch
Medium Silent 336h
FTX-0007 C2b vLLM KV-cache exhaustion under
bursty load
High Immediate 0.5h
FTX-0008 C2a ChatGPT outage latency spike (Dec
2022)
High Immediate 1h
FTX-0013 C3a Bing Chat Sydney prompt injection
(Feb 2023)
Critical Delayed 24h
FTX-0014 C3d RAG stale index serving outdated
Basel III guidance
Critical Silent 2880h
FTX-0026 C4a MMLU fine-tuned model degraded
real-world performance
Medium Silent 720h
FTX-0027 C4b Evaluation set contamination in
benchmark study
Medium Silent 1440h
FTX-0031 C5b Mata v. Avianca hallucinated
citations (2023)
Critical Delayed 48h
FTX-0032 C5a Samsung employee PII leak via
ChatGPT (2023)
Critical Delayed 72h
FTX-0044 C6a Output-length drift unmonitored for
3 weeks
Medium Delayed 504h
FTX-0045 C6b No runbook for model API
deprecation scenario
High Delayed 120h
19

C Failure Budget Calculator
The reference implementation computes budget utilisation per use case. Core logic (Python pseu-
docode):
BUDGET_RATES = {FC_A: 1.0, FC_B: 5.0,
FC_C: 20.0, FC_D: 100.0}
SEVERITY_WEIGHTS = {critical: 3, high: 2,
medium: 1, low: 0.5}
def budget_utilisation(uc, failures):
weighted = sum(SEVERITY_WEIGHTS[f.severity]
for f in failures)
rate = weighted / (uc.requests / 1000)
return (rate / BUDGET_RATES[uc.risk]) * 100
Full implementation with reporting and multi-use-case portfolio tracking: https:
//github.com/priyanka25aug/llm-failure-taxonomy/blob/main/src/failure_
budget/calculator.py.
Acknowledgments
The independent annotation study reported in Section 8 was conducted by Mukund Pandey (Staff ML
Engineer, Meta), who is also the author of Pandey [21], cited in this work. The author declares this
relationship in the interest of transparency; the annotation task was completed prior to any discussion
of this paper’s taxonomy definitions, and annotator independence was maintained throughout.
20
