
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2609.00275

The Irreversibility Budget: Fleet-Level Risk Accounting and
Admission Control for Agent Operating Systems
Bardia Mohammadi
bmohammadi@mpi-sws.org
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Saarbrücken, Germany
Laurent Bindschaedler
bindsch@mpi-sws.org
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Saarbrücken, Germany
Abstract
Fleets of LLM agents now externalize effects that cannot be fully
undone: they move money, deploy code, delete data, and disclose
information. Current controls check one effect at a time, so a fleet
of individually authorized agents can overdraw its principal’s risk
under a shared trigger while every local gate stays correct. We
propose the irreversibility budget, a cumulative account of residual
value-at-risk that a trusted runtime maintains for each principal
across agents, workflows, and tenants. Treating irreversibility as a
first-class resource, the runtime charges each effect its residual loss
below the agent and denies the marginal effect once the aggregate
would overdraw the budget. Getting the price right is hard, because
effects are heterogeneous, adversarially declared, and correlated.
We perform a controlled study in which per-effect gates admit fleet-
level overdraws of up to 48× the tenant’s risk limit while the budget
holds every correctly charged run within that limit. Conservative,
dependency-aware pricing remains the central open problem for a
deployable design.
1 Introduction
Fleets of LLM agents now call tools, update durable state, and exter-
nalize effects whose consequences may not be fully reversible. They
move money, deploy code, delete data, and disclose information.
Managing scarce or dangerous shared quantities is the classic job of
an operating system, which measures memory, CPU time, and I/O
bandwidth, allocates them to principals, charges them at use, and
defends them under contention. Agent operating systems are only
beginning to emerge [16, 21], but any of them will inherit this job
for a quantity today’s runtimes leave unmanaged: the irreversible
exposure a fleet creates in the outside world. Unlike memory, it is a
residual loss that depends on the effect, its compensation, and how
other agents are spending at the same time.
Existing controls do not manage this quantity. They answer
local questions: one defers settlement, another validates a task’s
authority, a third prices a review, and a fourth insures an individ-
ual action [6, 7, 14, 15, 17, 18, 23]. None keeps a running balance
across agents. Consider, for example, fifty individually capped pro-
curement agents that all watch the same supplier price spike and,
each acting rationally, decide to buy at once. Every purchase clears
its local cap, yet together they commit a seven-figure position no
reviewer approved. Each action is allowed, but the fleet overdraws.
Accounting for this before commit is hard: effects differ in how
much loss survives them, an agent can misdeclare or split an effect
to slip under a cap, and a shared trigger correlates losses that a
naive account would simply add up.
We propose the irreversibility budget, a cumulative account of
residual value-at-risk that a trusted runtime maintains for every
principal: an agent, the workflow it runs in, or the tenant that owns
them. The key idea is to treat irreversibility as a first-class resource,
the way an operating system treats memory: a trusted runtime
below the agent charges each effect the loss expected to survive
recovery, adds it to one running balance per principal, and then de-
nies or escalates the next effect once that balance would exceed the
authorized budget. This meets the three difficulties in turn: pricing
residual loss rather than face value handles heterogeneity, charging
below the agent stops a compromised model from misdeclaring or
splitting an effect to slip under a cap, and a single shared balance
turns a correlated burst into a visible overdraw that no per-effect
gate can see. The outcome is that existing per-effect controls stop
being independent gates and become spending policies over one
shared resource. Realizing it takes a resource model that defines the
quantity and the budgets it is charged against, plus a runtime that
prices and reserves against them, both shown on the procurement
example in Figure 1.
We evaluate the abstraction with a controlled simulation of this
procurement fleet, a study of public agent traces, and a ledger
microbenchmark. The results support the claim and mark its limit.
Local gates approve every purchase, yet the fleet overdraws its
risk limit by 2.4× on average, and by 48× once it has grown to
a thousand agents. The budget holds every run within the limit
at every size, and because it prices effects by type it admits more
useful work than a flat cap at the same safety. Its weakness is pricing:
when effect types are misdeclared, or a shared trigger correlates
losses that the charges assumed independent, realized loss can still
exceed what the ledger accounted for. The ledger itself is cheap.
Making those charges conservative and dependency-aware is the
open problem.
The paper makes three contributions: irreversible exposure as a
typed, cumulative admission quantity for agent operating systems
(§3), a trusted runtime that combines risk-typed effects, hierarchical
reserve-confirm-cancel ledgers, and value-at-risk admission control
(§4), and a controlled feasibility study that isolates the fleet-level
composition failure and shows dependency-aware pricing to be the
central open requirement (§5).
2 Background and Motivation
A running example. We make the procurement fleet concrete and
reuse it throughout. Each of the fifty agents owns one product line
and may place supplier orders up to $50k under a per-agent rate
limit, and the tenant tolerates $250k of unhedged exposure over a
trading day. On an ordinary day the agents buy independently and
stay well inside that envelope. However, imagine a shared trigger
where a supplier price-spike alert makes “buy now” rational for
arXiv:2609.00275v1 [cs.AI] 31 Aug 2026

Agentic OS Workshop, September 29, 2026, Prague, Czechia Bardia Mohammadi and Laurent Bindschaedler
Figure 1: The irreversibility budget on the running example. Fifty procurement agents share one trigger and each proposes a
locally authorized purchase (left). A trusted runtime prices each effect by its residual loss and charges it against one shared
ledger, denying the marginal effect once the aggregate would exceed the tenant’s limit (center). Per-effect gates overdraw by
2.4×, the budget stays within the limit (right).
every agent at once. These are the parameters simulated by the
evaluation in §5.
Why it generalizes. This failure is not special to procurement. It
appears wherever agents change the outside world: payroll runs,
infrastructure automation, data deletion, customer communica-
tion, and incident response. Operators in these settings already cap
scarce or risky quantities with quotas, approval limits, and desk-
level risk controls, precisely because local permission has never
implied aggregate safety. Agent fleets revive that pressure at higher
speed and with weaker principal boundaries, which turns the oper-
ator’s question from whether an action is allowed into how much
irreversible exposure remains before the next commit.
Why counting is not enough. Answering that question means pric-
ing effects rather than counting them. In the example, a canceled
draft order, a completed supplier order, and a signed long-term con-
tract carry very different residual loss once compensation, recovery,
and revocation are exhausted. A control that treats every effect
as one unit is therefore unsafe if it undercounts the irreversible
ones and unusably conservative if it treats them all as maximal.
Reversibility is a coordinate in the price rather than a binary gate.
The gap. Existing systems act one effect at a time. Table 1 lists
the closest: Atomix defers settlement until it is safe [17], Cordon
validates a task’s authority before release [7], actuarial gates such
as AAI quote and bind capital for a single trajectory [6], guardrails
and DLP validate payloads [20], and sagas supply compensation
paths [9, 10]. Each answers its local question well, and none keeps
the cumulative, cross-agent balance that would have caught the fleet
in the example. The missing mechanism is a pre-commit account
that spans agents, workflows, and tenants.
Three requirements. The pre-commit account faces three diffi-
culties, and each rules out a simpler design. Heterogeneous effects
rule out a face-value collective cap, which charges a canceled draft
and a signed contract alike and is safe only when it is uselessly
conservative. Adversarial agents rule out trusting declared charges,
because a compromised tool can split one large order into many
sub-cap orders or misdeclare the effect type that sets the charge.
Table 1: Existing mechanisms control local effects or domain-
specific counters, but none maintains a heterogeneous cross-
agent exposure account.
Mechanism Question Control Scope
Atomix [17] when defer settlement per effect
Cordon [7] whether validate authority per task
AAI [6] how much quote and bind capital per trajectory
Guardrails / DLP [20] should pass validate payload per call
Sagas / TCC [9, 10] how to undo compensate or refund per effect
Quotas / rate limits how many cap a known counter one unit
Pre-trade risk how exposed cap position risk finance
Shared drivers rule out summing independent charges, since one
price-spike alert or prompt injection makes many agents choose
the same irreversible effect. A deployable control must therefore
account before commit, canonicalize types, and price dependence.
3 Resource Model
§2 argued that a fleet needs a pre-commit account that prices effects,
spans principals, and treats correlated exposures as more than a
sum. This section defines that account as a resource. There are three
parts: the charge on an effect, the budget a principal spends against,
and the risk-pressure signal that drives admission.
Irreversible exposure. For an external effect 𝑒, define its charge
𝑐 (𝑒) as the residual loss over a configured horizon after available
compensation, recovery, and revocation have been applied. Effect
outcomes are stochastic, so the runtime charges at a confidence
level: 𝑐
𝛾 
(𝑒) is the 𝛾-quantile of the residual-loss distribution sup-
plied by the pricing component. The charge is a scalar in a financial
domain, or a vector when money, data loss, availability, and legal
exposure cannot be reduced to a common unit. Reversibility [9]
enters the price as one coordinate among several rather than acting
as a binary gate.
Irreversibility budget. Each principal 𝑝 is assigned a windowed
budget 𝐵
𝑝 
, and the runtime maintains a balance of reserved plus
committed exposure against it. The invariant is simple: a principal
may not externalize an effect when the marginal charge would
exceed its budget at the required confidence level. In the running

The Irreversibility Budget Agentic OS Workshop, September 29, 2026, Prague, Czechia
example, each of the fifty agents spends against its own allocation,
its workflow’s, and the tenant’s $250k envelope, so no agent’s local
freedom can overdraw the fleet’s ceiling. Budgets are replenished
on a horizon set by the budget authority: short windows bound
bursts, longer windows bound campaigns.
Risk pressure. We call the depletion signal risk pressure, the ana-
log of memory pressure: as a kernel reclaims pages and throttles
when free memory runs low, the runtime tightens admission as the
free budget falls and, in the extreme, freezes externalization (§4).
Risk pressure is a scheduling signal rather than a proof of safety,
turning a fixed per-call verdict into a control loop over a scarce
quantity.
4 The Runtime
The resource model says what to charge, and the runtime is the
machinery that charges it. Its jobs are to make an effect’s exposure
observable before the effect commits, to stop a fleet from double-
spending one budget, and to decide admission when the budget runs
low. The mechanisms below meet these jobs, each an existing prim-
itive moved below the agent’s trust boundary, so a compromised
model can neither price nor quietly spend its own risk.
Risk-typed effects. To make exposure observable before commit,
tool specifications declare effect classes, exposure bounds, reversibil-
ity paths, compensation mechanisms, authority requirements, and
dependency hints. Existing taxonomies of reversible, compensat-
able, and irreversible effects provide the initial type structure [9].
Pricing sits below the agent, so charges 𝑐
𝛾 
(𝑒) come from specifi-
cations and a trusted pricing service, never from the model; the
charge itself is only as trusted as the specification author and its
auditor. Many domains already encode partial versions of this in-
formation in approval rules, cloud quotas, and retention policies,
and the runtime makes those implicit controls executable at the
commit boundary.
Canonicalization. A charge is only as sound as the type it is read
from, so the runtime assigns that type itself rather than accepting
one from the caller. A trusted registry binds each effect class to
the evidence that identifies it: the calling tool’s identity and signed
specification, the API endpoint and request schema the call resolves
to, and the settlement receipt that later confirms what actually
happened. A compromised workflow can therefore propose a final
transfer, but it cannot declare that transfer refundable, because it
never supplies the label. What the registry cannot resolve is charged
at the most expensive matching class, so an unrecognized effect is
throttled rather than silently admitted. The trusted base is wider
than the ledger: the registry and its auditors, the tool wrappers, the
pricing service, and principal attribution.
Charge lifecycle. Charges are initialized from the conservative
bound in the effect specification, calibrated offline by replaying
traces and stress cases against realized residual loss, and audited
against settlement receipts, which are the only ground truth about
how much recovery actually returned. They are adjusted when the
pricer detects a dependency, either a correlation class declared on
a workflow or a shared trigger inferred from the proposal stream,
so the marginal charge for the next effect in that class rises instead
Algorithm 1 Value-at-risk admission (reserve).
1: input: effect 𝑒, principal path 𝑃 (agent → workflow → tenant)
2: 𝑐 ← pricer.charge(𝑒, context, 𝛾 ) ⊲ charge, never from the agent
3: atomically
4: for all ledger ℓ ∈ 𝑃 do
5: if ℓ.reserved + ℓ.committed + 𝑐 > ℓ.𝐵 then return deny
6: end if
7: end for
8: for all ledger ℓ ∈ 𝑃 do ℓ.reserved += 𝑐
9: end for
10: return reservation id ⊲ confirm commits it; cancel refunds it
of repeating the independent price. §5 breaks both the binding and
the calibration, and reports what each is worth.
Hierarchical ledgers and reservations. Per-principal ledgers ex-
pose native reserve, confirm, and cancel calls that keep a fleet
from double-spending one risk envelope: speculative branches re-
serve before acting, confirm on commit, and refund on cancellation
or successful compensation [10, 19]. Admission checks every ledger
on the effect’s principal path and reserves atomically across them.
Algorithm 1 gives the reserve procedure. The ledger must guaran-
tee four invariants: no overdraft, idempotent confirmation, crash
recovery, and hierarchical roll-up.
Admission and scheduling under risk pressure. Value-at-risk ad-
mission control is the rule: an effect commits only if reserved and
committed exposure stay within allocation at every principal on
the agent-to-workflow-to-tenant path. As risk pressure rises, the
runtime tightens confidence, demotes low-value spenders, expires
stale reservations, batches approvals, or escalates to a rate-limited
authority with explicit latency and capacity budgets. Escalation
does not raise 𝐵. Instead, the authority mints a separate audited
exception allocation and charges the effect against that, so the
principal’s ordinary budget is untouched and the extra exposure is
recorded as approved rather than as headroom, because approved
exposure is risk a principal chose to take, whereas the failure mode
is risk the ledger failed to stop. Delegation treats capabilities as risk
currency: attenuable tokens denominated in risk units that an agent
must spend rather than merely present. Schedulers already trade
fairness, priority, and utilization under scarcity; here the scarce
quantity is irreversible exposure, and denial happens before the
effect commits.
The contract. The ledger guarantee is narrow. It prevents over-
draft in declared charge units, under four assumptions: authenticated
principals, strongly consistent budget authorities, idempotent reser-
vation lifecycles, and charges supplied by trusted effect specifica-
tions. It does not guarantee bounded realized loss under stale prices,
correlations absent from the charge model, malicious type decla-
rations, or misattributed workflows. The design therefore exposes
two layers of guarantee: a declared-charge bound that the ledger
enforces unconditionally, and a realized-loss bound that depends on
calibrated, dependency-aware pricing.
5 Evaluation
We evaluate the runtime design as a controlled feasibility study
rather than a deployed agent OS. Five research questions organize
it: whether per-effect safety fails under composition and a budgeted
ledger can bound exposure before commit (RQ1), whether the need

Agentic OS Workshop, September 29, 2026, Prague, Czechia Bardia Mohammadi and Laurent Bindschaedler
Table 2: Simulation parameters.
Parameter Value
Fleet / window 50 agents / 1,000 ticks
Proposal prob. (calm, burst) 0.0005; 0.05 for 50 ticks
Purchase value log-normal, median ∼$15k
Recovery fraction 𝑟 Beta(6, 2), mean 0.75
Tolerance 𝑅 / budget 𝐵 $250k / 𝑅
Charge 𝑐
0.95 
(𝑒 ) 0.52 𝑣 (95th-pct. residual)
Local baseline $50k call cap + rate limit
for accounting persists under fleet growth, fragmentation, and
reactive alternatives (RQ2), what liveness and scheduling costs
the budget introduces (RQ3), when risk typing and calibration help
and when they fail (RQ4), and whether public agent traces support
the shared-trigger correlation the simulation assumes (RQ5).
Workload. The main workload is a discrete-event procurement
simulation of the running example, and Table 2 lists its parame-
ters. Routine demand typically fills roughly 85% of the budget, a
correlated market trigger raises every agent’s proposal probability
for 50 ticks, and an executed purchase of value 𝑣 realizes residual
exposure 𝑣 (1 − 𝑟 ). Charges come from declared effect types, and
only the ledger microbenchmark models admission latency.
Baselines. The local-gates baseline enforces a per-call cap and
per-agent rate limit with no shared state, and the budget runtime
reserves the 95th-percentile charge 𝑐
0.95 
(𝑒) = 0.52 𝑣 and denies any
effect whose charge would push the reserved balance past 𝐵. We
also run the strongest aggregate alternatives an operator would use:
face-value and pooled-quantile caps, static per-agent partitions, a
reactive circuit breaker, and hierarchical sub-budgets.
Metrics and protocol. A run overdraws when realized exposure
that no authority approved exceeds 𝑅 in any window, so overdraw
measures what the ledger let through silently. We also report re-
alized exposure relative to 𝑅, admitted routine and burst traffic,
attacker value moved, sibling-workflow throughput, and reserva-
tion latency. Results are means over 300 seeded runs with 95%
confidence intervals and Wilson intervals for overdraw propor-
tions. We release the simulator, seeds, parameters, benchmark, and
trace analysis at https://github.com/mpi-dsg/irreversibility-budget.
Ledger overhead. The ledger microbenchmark measures the reser-
vation lifecycle in isolation rather than an integrated runtime,
on a single host, in memory, with no persistence, replication, or
crash recovery. A reserve-then-confirm across a three-level agent-
workflow-tenant path costs 2.6 𝜇s at the median and 240 bytes
per live reservation, and a shared tenant root under 32 concur-
rent threads sustains a few ×10
5 
reservation cycles per second.
This number bounds the accounting work rather than the cost of
a durable budget authority, which must add a log write on every
spend and, across hosts, a round of coordination on any violating
spend.
5.1 Composition (RQ1)
We ask whether per-effect safety composes to the fleet. Every pro-
posal stays within its per-call cap and rate limit, so the only differ-
ence between arms is whether admission also checks an aggregate
budget.
0 1 2 3 4 5
Realized aggregate exposure (fraction of R)
Local gates
Budget ledger
Local + collusion
Budget + collusion
P(overdraw) = 1.00
P(overdraw) = 0.00
P(overdraw) = 1.00
P(overdraw) = 0.00
tolerance R
Figure 2: Realized aggregate exposure as a fraction of toler-
ance 𝑅, with and without a colluding fragmentation attack.
Bars are means over 300 runs; ticks mark the 95th percentile.
Local gates approve every action and overdraw in every run.
The budget bounds exposure below 𝑅 in both settings.
Results. Figure 2 contrasts the two arms. Local gates approve
every purchase and still overdraw in all 300 runs, at 2.4× tolerance
on average, while the budget overdraws in none of them, with
a 95% upper bound of 1.3% on overdraw probability, and settles
near 0.48× tolerance. The gap is structural rather than a tuning
artifact: no per-call gate can see the running sum, so none can deny
the marginal purchase that tips the fleet over. The budget’s 0.48×
occupancy is simply the arithmetic of a full ledger whose realized
exposure concentrates near the mean-to-quantile ratio 0.25/0.52 of
𝐵.
5.2 Scale and alternatives (RQ2)
We ask whether the gap grows, and whether cheaper alternatives
close it. We hold 𝑅 fixed and grow the fleet from ten to a thousand
agents, then add two variants: a fragmentation attack that splits
one economic action into many sub-cap ones, and a circuit breaker
that halts the fleet once observed loss reaches 𝑅.
Results. The overdraw grows with the fleet. Local gates are safe
at ten agents but reach 2.4× tolerance at fifty, 9.7× at two hundred,
and 48× at a thousand, because aggregate demand scales while
each agent individually stays compliant. The budget holds near
0.48× at every size. The alternatives fail for instructive reasons.
Fragmentation slips the full $1.5M transfer past local gates to 3.9×
tolerance, yet the ledger admits only $459k of that value, however
finely the attacker splits it, because the charge attaches to exposure
rather than to call count. The circuit breaker ends at 1.03 × 𝑅 with
instant observation and 2.2 × 𝑅 at a fifty-tick lag, because it reads
loss only after the irreversible effect has already committed.
Takeaway. The gap widens with scale, and only a control that
reserves before commit, rather than counting calls or reacting to
loss, stays safe as the fleet grows.
5.3 Liveness (RQ3)
Safety by denial is easy to state and easy to abuse, so we ask what
the budget costs in useful work. We sweep the budget size 𝐵/𝑅.
Separately, four scheduling arms stress hoarding, sibling isolation,
campaign pacing, and re-authorization.
Results. Figure 3 shows the trade-off. A budget of 𝐵 = 𝑅 passes
routine pre-burst traffic in full and admits 14% of the correlated

The Irreversibility Budget Agentic OS Workshop, September 29, 2026, Prague, Czechia
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00
Budget size B/R
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fraction
pre-burst routine executed
correlated burst admitted
P(overdraw)
Figure 3: Safety and liveness against budget size 𝐵/𝑅 (300
runs; error bars are 95% Wilson intervals on the overdraw
proportion). Larger budgets admit more burst traffic and, past
1.5𝑅, increase overdraw risk.
Table 3: Four secondary arms: the budget’s scheduling poli-
cies and liveness stress tests, 300 runs each.
Arm Setup Result
Fair-share per-principal cap 0.05𝐵,
fragmentation
attacker value moved $459k →
$200k; bound holds against 40 col-
luders
Replenishment 
three windows, paced
campaign
per-window resets admit 72% of a
campaign; a flat 1.5𝑅 horizon ledger
is an outage or a no-op
Hierarchy 
rogue workflow, flat vs.
nested ledger
sibling throughput 48% → 89% with
a 0.6𝐵 sub-budget; tenant bound
holds
Re-authorization rate-limited authority, 𝐻
effects/window
𝐻 =50 restores post-burst liveness to
93%, adding $75k of audited expo-
sure
burst, and even 𝐵 = 𝑅/2 preserves 93% of routine traffic, so the
price of safety falls mostly on the burst rather than on ordinary
work. The sharper cost is temporal: once the window’s budget
is spent, post-burst traffic starves until replenishment. Enlarging
the budget buys burst headroom but reintroduces overdraw, up
to 33% of runs at 𝐵 = 2𝑅, so the knob is real but not free. Table 3
shows the scheduling arms recovering most of the lost liveness:
fair-share admission curbs hoarding, per-workflow ledgers lift an
innocent sibling’s throughput from 48% to 89%, and rate-limited
re-authorization restores post-burst liveness to 93% while making
the extra $75k of exposure audited rather than silent.
Takeaway. The budget trades burst liveness for safety on a tun-
able knob, and per-workflow ledgers plus paced re-authorization
recover most of it without hiding exposure.
5.4 Typing and pricing (RQ4)
The ledger enforces only declared charges, so we ask whether
typing effects by residual loss beats flat counting, and how charge
errors actually fail. We scale declared charges by a factor 𝜀 around
the true quantile, compare a typed ledger against face-value and
pooled caps on a mixed refundable-and-final workload, and then
break the charges’ independence assumption with a burst that
depresses recovery.
0.25 0.5 0.75 1 1.5 2 4
Charge scaling factor ε
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fraction
underpriced overpriced
proposed value executed
P(overdraw)
Figure 4: Mispricing sensitivity: declared charges scaled by 𝜀
relative to the 95th-percentile charge (300 runs; error bars
are 95% Wilson intervals). Underpricing fails toward silent
overdraw; overpricing toward throttling.
Results. Figure 4 shows that mispricing is asymmetric. Under-
pricing fails silently, overdrawing in 32% of runs already at half
the true charge, whereas overpricing fails only as throttling (𝜀 = 4
executes 5% of proposed value), a failure the scheduler can see and
correct; charges should therefore fail conservatively. When charges
are right, typing pays: the typed ledger executes 1.8× the value
of a face-value cap and 1.7× the strongest pooled cap, a gain that
tracks heterogeneity and shrinks to 1.2× as effect classes converge.
Two failures bound that result. Misdeclaring colluding transfers
as refundable re-opens the cap to $1.0M and overdraws in 77% of
runs, and a shared trigger that depresses recovery from 0.75 to
0.25 makes additive per-effect charging overdraw in 59% of runs
while the ledger believes itself safe. Repricing at the burst quantile
fixes the latter only with near-instant detection: a five-tick lag in a
fifty-tick burst still overdraws 39% of runs, and a ten-tick lag is no
better than no detector at all.
Takeaway. Typing buys real utility when charges are honest,
but misdeclaration and correlated recovery let realized loss outrun
the ledger’s belief, which makes conservative, dependency-aware
pricing the central open requirement.
5.5 Trace evidence (RQ5)
The whole model rests on shared triggers correlating losses, which
the simulator cannot justify on its own, so we test it against real be-
havior. We analyzed 38,452 trajectories from the public 𝜏-bench [24]
and AgentDojo [8] benchmarks and asked whether irreversible ef-
fects are agent-idiosyncratic or task-determined. In 𝜏-bench we
read the 165 tasks with at least three trials as fleets of independent
agents meeting the same context, and compare their agreement
against a permutation null that breaks the task-to-effect link while
preserving each effect’s marginal rate. In AgentDojo the runs shar-
ing one planted prompt injection, a single instruction placed in a
shared resource and met by agents running different user tasks, are
the fleet; we report the 35 injections with at least 20 runs. A fixed
vocabulary map tags pay, refund, delete, update, send, and create
as external effects, and marks a prefix read-only only when every
call in it unambiguously is.

Agentic OS Workshop, September 29, 2026, Prague, Czechia Bardia Mohammadi and Laurent Bindschaedler
Results. External effects account for 22% of tool calls, and a sin-
gle agent’s effects are typically sparse and end-loaded, so no agent
bursts on its own. The correlation lives across agents: which exter-
nal effect fires is task-determined rather than agent-specific (𝑧 up to
198 against an independent-agent null), and one planted instruction
propagates the same external effect across 84% of a heterogeneous
fleet on average (minimum 48%). This is precisely the structure the
additive charges in RQ4 fail to price.
Takeaway. Real traces confirm that shared context drives cor-
related external effects, so the regime the budget targets is the
common case.
6 Discussion and Limitations
Limitations. The study establishes the accounting mechanism
rather than a deployed system. It does not show that value-at-risk is
the right risk measure, that calibration is solved, or that distributed
ledgers stay available under partition, and it does not exercise the
full reserve-confirm-cancel lifecycle, capability delegation, vector
charges, or refunds. Two biases follow: liveness cost is measured
pessimistically because refunds are absent, and safety is measured
optimistically because prices are constructed rather than learned.
These failures define the contract a deployable budget must meet:
trusted effect typing, dependency-aware charging, workflow-level
attribution, and denial before commit.
Pricing and budget setting. The budget is only as sound as its
charges and as useful as the authority’s choice of 𝐵. A business tol-
erance does not directly define a charge budget, and larger budgets
trade liveness for weaker realized-loss bounds. Vector budgets may
be needed when losses are not commensurable, since data exposure,
availability damage, and reputational harm resist a common scalar
in a way money does not. We use value-at-risk because operators
know it and it is cheap to simulate, but the abstraction does not re-
quire it, and value-at-risk is not subadditive while expected shortfall
is coherent [2]. Charges should fail conservatively, so mispricing
escalates rather than silently admits.
Correlation. The tractable middle ground between independent
charges and worst-case coupling remains open: correlation classes
declared per workflow, shared-trigger detection from proposal
streams, and marginal charges under an explicit dependency model.
Detection must run early enough to affect admission before most
of the burst’s exposure commits.
Distributed accounting. A budget that can be double-spent pro-
vides telemetry rather than control. Across hosts, hard budgets
require coordination on any violating spend, while advisory bud-
gets reconcile later and cannot enforce safety. The runtime should
separate the two, shard by principal hierarchy, and report the avail-
ability cost of strong budget authorities.
Adversarial spenders. Prompt-injected or colluding agents can
fragment actions below thresholds, hoard reservations, misdeclare
types, or manipulate refunds [8, 20]. Canonicalization must there-
fore span agents and workflows, because the shared budget itself
becomes the target, and re-authorization must be rate-limited and
audited rather than an unlimited human escape hatch. Our bonded-
recourse design settles the compensations themselves [5].
Liveness. A budget converts some unsafe commits into denial,
contention, and auditable re-authorization. It can hold the bound
and still starve routine work after a burst, or let an attacker convert
theft into reservation denial-of-service. Reservation expiry, work-
flow sub-budgets, fair-share admission, replenishment horizons,
and authority overrides are scheduling policy.
7 Related Work
This work combines existing mechanisms from database transac-
tions, OS resource accounting, financial risk control, and agent
safety. The novelty is their use together as a cross-principal admis-
sion resource for typed, heterogeneous, adversarial agent effects.
Database and OS primitives. Database escrow [19] and saga com-
pensation [9, 10] supply the reserve-confirm-cancel lifecycle, re-
source containers [4] supply the move of charging a principal
rather than a process, and coordination avoidance [3, 11] sepa-
rates invariant-preserving local updates from updates that require
agreement. We apply these primitives to risk units at the tool-
commit boundary, where the runtime must be able to deny before
an external effect settles.
Agent effect controls. The mechanisms summarized in Table 1 pro-
tect individual effects or branches by controlling settlement time,
semantic authority, or payload validity [7, 17, 20]. Our group’s
vision papers argue for OS-level confinement of exploratory ef-
fects [13] and for checking effects instead of trusting code [12]; the
budget adds what these lack: cumulative accounting across agents,
workflows, and tenants.
Risk pricing and safe learning. Settlement and underwriting sys-
tems price or compensate single actions and trajectories [14, 23].
Constrained and safe reinforcement learning caps cumulative safety
cost inside one agent’s policy optimization [1]. Single-agent actuar-
ial admission gates price actions and defend against fragmentation
within a trajectory [6]. Our setting moves pricing below untrusted
agents and aggregates across principals, so collusion and shared
drivers naturally become first-order concerns.
Governance and operational caps. A governance proposal already
names an irreversibility budget, but treats it as an additive cap
with human re-authorization [22]. Additivity suits sparse, human-
supervised settings rather than dense fleets with fragmentation,
misdeclaration, and correlated recoverability. Credit-card limits,
cloud quotas, and pre-trade checks cap one known unit, whereas
agent fleets need typed residual-loss accounting. The budget also
differs from access control, which decides whether an action is
allowed: the budget denies an allowed action because the aggregate
would overdraw, a claim no per-call mechanism expresses.
8 Conclusion
No runtime tracks the irreversible exposure that fleets of tool-using
agents build up together. We proposed the irreversibility budget, a
cumulative per-principal account that a trusted runtime charges
before commit, denying an effect once the fleet would overdraw.
Local gates approved every action and still overdrew by up to 48×,
while the budget held every correctly charged run within the risk
limit. Conservative, dependency-aware pricing remains open, but
irreversibility as a first-class resource gives agent operating systems
a place to account for it.

The Irreversibility Budget Agentic OS Workshop, September 29, 2026, Prague, Czechia
References
[1] Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. 2017. Constrained
Policy Optimization. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML 2017) (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 70), Doina
Precup and Yee Whye Teh (Eds.). PMLR, Sydney, Australia, 22–31. https://
proceedings.mlr.press/v70/achiam17a.html
[2] Philippe Artzner, Freddy Delbaen, Jean-Marc Eber, and David Heath. 1999.
Coherent Measures of Risk. Mathematical Finance 9, 3 (July 1999), 203–228.
doi:10.1111/1467-9965.00068
[3] Peter Bailis, Alan D. Fekete, Michael J. Franklin, Ali Ghodsi, Joseph M. Hellerstein,
and Ion Stoica. 2014. Coordination Avoidance in Database Systems. Proceedings
of the VLDB Endowment 8, 3 (Nov. 2014), 185–196. doi:10.14778/2735508.2735509
[4] Gaurav Banga, Peter Druschel, and Jeffrey C. Mogul. 1999. Resource Con-
tainers: A New Facility for Resource Management in Server Systems. In
Proceedings of the Third USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI ’99). USENIX Association, New Orleans, LA, USA,
45–58. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi-99/resource-containers-new-
facility-resource-management-server-systems
[5] Laurent Bindschaedler, Quentin Botha, and Christoph Siebenbrunner. 2026.
Bonded Recourse for Smart-Contract Settlement of Compensable Agent Side
Effects. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Blockchain Computing
and Applications (BCCA 2026). IEEE, Barcelona, Spain. To appear.
[6] Hao-Hsuan Chen. 2026. Insuring Every Action: An Authority Fron-
tier Framework for Runtime Actuarial Control of Autonomous AI Agents.
arXiv:2605.25632 [cs.AI] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2605.25632
[7] Zheng Chen, Hanqing Liu, Duling Xu, Dong Dong, Jialin Li, Bangzheng Pu, and
Jidong Zhai. 2026. Cordon: Semantic Transactions for Tool-Using LLM Agents.
arXiv:2606.17573 [cs.OS] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2606.17573
[8] Edoardo Debenedetti, Jie Zhang, Mislav Balunović, Luca Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fis-
cher, and Florian Tramèr. 2024. AgentDojo: A Dynamic Environment to Evaluate
Prompt Injection Attacks and Defenses for LLM Agents. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 37 (NeurIPS 2024), Vol. 37. Curran Associates,
Inc., Vancouver, Canada, 82895–82920. doi:10.52202/079017-2636 Datasets and
Benchmarks Track.
[9] Hector Garcia-Molina and Kenneth Salem. 1987. Sagas. In Proceedings of the 1987
ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD ’87)
(San Francisco, CA, USA). ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 249–259. doi:10.1145/
38713.38742
[10] Pat Helland. 2007. Life beyond Distributed Transactions: an Apostate’s Opinion.
In Proceedings of the Third Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems Re-
search (CIDR 2007). CIDR, Asilomar, CA, USA, 132–141. https://www.cidrdb.org/
cidr2007/papers/cidr07p15.pdf
[11] Joseph M. Hellerstein and Peter Alvaro. 2020. Keeping CALM: When Distributed
Consistency Is Easy. Commun. ACM 63, 9 (Sept. 2020), 72–81. doi:10.1145/3369736
[12] Jinhao Hu, Ashvin Goel, and Laurent Bindschaedler. 2026. Don’t Trust the
Code, Check Its Effects. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Practical Adoption
Challenges of ML for Systems (PACMI 2026). ACM. To appear.
[13] Jinhao Hu, Bardia Mohammadi, Ashvin Goel, and Laurent Bindschaedler. 2026.
Externalization Barriers: An OS Abstraction for Untrusted Agent Exploration. In
The 2nd Workshop on OS Design for AI Agents (AgenticOS 2026). ACM, Prague,
Czech Republic. To appear.
[14] Wenyue Hua, Tianyi Peng, Chi Wang, Jiaxin Pei, Ian Kaufman, Bryan Lim, and
Chandler Fang. 2026. Quantifying Trust: Financial Risk Management for Trust-
worthy AI Agents. arXiv:2604.03976 [cs.AI] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2604.03976
[15] David Madras, Toniann Pitassi, and Richard S. Zemel. 2018. Predict Responsibly:
Improving Fairness and Accuracy by Learning to Defer. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 31 (NeurIPS 2018), Vol. 31. Curran Associates, Inc.,
Montreal, Canada, 6150–6160.
[16] Kai Mei, Xi Zhu, Wujiang Xu, Mingyu Jin, Wenyue Hua, Zelong Li, Shuyuan Xu,
Ruosong Ye, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2025. AIOS: LLM Agent Oper-
ating System. In Second Conference on Language Modeling (COLM 2025). Open-
Review.net, Montreal, Canada. https://openreview.net/forum?id=L4HHkCDz2x
Also available as arXiv:2403.16971.
[17] Bardia Mohammadi, Nearchos Potamitis, Lars Henning Klein, Akhil Arora, and
Laurent Bindschaedler. 2026. Atomix: Timely, Transactional Tool Use for Reliable
Agentic Workflows. In ICLR 2026 Workshop on Agents in the Wild: Safety, Security,
and Beyond (AIWILD). OpenReview.net, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. https://openreview.
net/forum?id=UeRbEpSVUz Also available as arXiv:2602.14849 [cs.LG].
[18] Hussein Mozannar and David Sontag. 2020. Consistent Estimators for Learning
to Defer to an Expert. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML 2020) (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 119),
Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (Eds.). PMLR, Virtual Event, 7076–7087. https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v119/mozannar20b.html
[19] Patrick E. O’Neil. 1986. The Escrow Transactional Method. ACM Transactions on
Database Systems 11, 4 (Dec. 1986), 405–430. doi:10.1145/7239.7265
[20] OWASP Gen AI Security Project, Agentic Security Initiative. 2025. Agentic AI
- Threats and Mitigations. White paper, version 1.1. https://genai.owasp.org/
resource/agentic-ai-threats-and-mitigations/ Version 1.1, February 2025.
[21] Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion
Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2023. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as Operating
Systems. arXiv:2310.08560 [cs.AI] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2310.08560
[22] Subramanyam Sahoo. 2026. The Controllability Trap: A Governance Framework
for Military AI Agents. In ICLR 2026 Workshop on Agents in the Wild: Safety,
Security, and Beyond (AIWILD). OpenReview.net, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=yLkGf4Uw14 Also available as arXiv:2603.03515
[cs.CY].
[23] Binyan Xu, Xilin Dai, Fan Yang, and Kehuan Zhang. 2026. When Agent Automa-
tion Becomes Profitable: Quantifying and Insuring Autonomous AI Risk through
Trace-Economic Underwriting. arXiv:2606.16465 [cs.AI] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2606.
16465
[24] Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2025. 𝜏-
bench: A Benchmark for Tool-Agent-User Interaction in Real-World Domains. In
The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2025).
OpenReview.net, Virtual Event. https://openreview.net/forum?id=roNSXZpUDN
Also available as arXiv:2406.12045.
