                                                                          AI Agents That Matter


                                            Sayash Kapoor∗ , Benedikt Stroebl∗ , Zachary S. Siegel, Nitya Nadgir, Arvind Narayanan

                                                                                      Princeton University
                                                                                          July 2, 2024




arXiv:2407.01502v1 [cs.LG] 1 Jul 2024
                                                                                           Abstract

                                                     AI agents are an exciting new research direction, and agent development is driven
                                                     by benchmarks. Our analysis of current agent benchmarks and evaluation practices
                                                     reveals several shortcomings that hinder their usefulness in real-world applications.
                                                     First, there is a narrow focus on accuracy without attention to other metrics. As
                                                     a result, SOTA agents are needlessly complex and costly, and the community has
                                                     reached mistaken conclusions about the sources of accuracy gains. Our focus on
                                                     cost in addition to accuracy motivates the new goal of jointly optimizing the two
                                                     metrics. We design and implement one such optimization, showing its potential
                                                     to greatly reduce cost while maintaining accuracy. Second, the benchmarking
                                                     needs of model and downstream developers have been conflated, making it hard
                                                     to identify which agent would be best suited for a particular application. Third,
                                                     many agent benchmarks have inadequate holdout sets, and sometimes none at all.
                                                     This has led to agents that are fragile because they take shortcuts and overfit to the
                                                     benchmark in various ways. We prescribe a principled framework for avoiding
                                                     overfitting. Finally, there is a lack of standardization in evaluation practices, leading
                                                     to a pervasive lack of reproducibility. We hope that the steps we introduce for
                                                     addressing these shortcomings will spur the development of agents that are useful
                                                     in the real world and not just accurate on benchmarks.


                                        1        Introduction
                                        Compound AI systems, or AI agents, are becoming an important research direction. Zaharia et al.
                                        [63] argue that “compound AI systems will likely be the best way to maximize AI results in the future,
                                        and might be one of the most impactful trends in AI in 2024.” Over a dozen agent benchmarks have
                                        been released, spanning domains such as web interaction [66], programming [21] and tool use [39].
                                        Many benchmarks developed for LLM evaluation have also been used for agent evaluation.
                                        Agent evaluation differs from language model evaluation in fundamental ways. Agents can be used
                                        on tasks that are harder, more realistic, have more real-world utility, and usually don’t have a single
                                        correct answer. For example, agents can use the command line to carry out tasks; SWE-Agent even
                                        includes its own agent-computer interface [59]. Agents can cost much more than a single model call.
                                        For example, the authors of SWE-Agent capped each run of the agent at $4 USD, which translates to
                                        hundreds of thousands of language model tokens.
                                        As a result, agent benchmarking comes with distinct challenges. This paper empirically demonstrates
                                        these challenges and provides recommendations for addressing them. Specifically, we make five
                                        contributions.

                                        1. AI agent evaluations must be cost-controlled (Section 2). The language models underlying
                                           most AI agents are stochastic. This means simply calling the underlying model multiple times
                                           can increase accuracy [27, 6, 26]. We introduce three new simple baseline agents and empirically
                                             *
                                                 Equal Contribution. Contact: {sayashk,stroebl}@princeton.edu
    show that they outperform many SoTA complex agent architectures on HumanEval [64, 65, 44]
    while costing much less. Therefore, agent evaluations must be cost-controlled; otherwise it will
    encourage researchers to develop extremely costly agents just to claim they topped the leaderboard.
2. Jointly optimizing accuracy and cost can yield better agent design (Section 3). Visualizing
   evaluation results as a Pareto curve of accuracy and inference cost opens up a new space of
   agent design: jointly optimizing the two metrics. We modify the DSPy framework [24] for joint
   optimization, lowering cost while maintaining accuracy on HotPotQA [60].
3. Model developers and downstream developers have distinct benchmarking needs (Section 4).
   Through a case study of NovelQA [53], we show how benchmarks meant for model evaluation can
   be misleading when used for downstream evaluation. We argue that downstream evaluation should
   account for dollar costs, rather than proxies for cost such as the number of model parameters.
4. Agent benchmarks enable shortcuts (Section 5). We show that many types of overfitting to
   agent benchmarks are possible. We identify 4 levels of generality of agents and argue that different
   types of hold-out samples are needed based on the desired level of generality. Without proper
   hold-outs, agent developers can take shortcuts, even unintentionally. We illustrate this with a case
   study of the WebArena benchmark [66].
5. Agent evaluations lack standardization and reproducibility (Section 6). We found pervasive
   shortcomings in the reproducibility of WebArena and HumanEval evaluations (Table A6). These
   errors inflate accuracy estimates and lead to overoptimism about agent capabilities.

The overarching goal of our work is to stimulate the development of agents that are useful in the real
world and not just accurate on benchmarks. (1) and (2) above do this by incorporating metrics beyond
accuracy into agent evaluation and optimization; (4) and (5) do so by improving precision about what
a benchmark aims to measures and ensuring that it actually measures that; and (3) does both.

1.1   What is an AI agent?

In traditional AI, agents are defined as entities that perceive and act upon their environment [40].
In the LLM era, the term is used in a narrower way (a thermostat would qualify as an agent under
the traditional definition). Many researchers have tried to formalize the community’s intuitive
understanding of what constitutes an agent in the context of language-model-based systems. Many of
them view it as a spectrum — sometimes denoted by the term ‘agentic’ [38] — rather than a binary
definition of an agent. We agree with this perspective. Since there are already many definitions, we
do not provide a new one, but rather identify the factors that cause an AI system to be considered
more agentic according to existing definitions. We found three clusters of factors.

• Environment and goals. The more complex the environment — e.g. range of tasks and domains,
  multi-stakeholder, long time horizon, unexpected changes — the more AI systems operating in that
  environment are agentic [41, 14]. Systems that pursue complex goals without being instructed on
  how to pursue the goal are more agentic [41, 4, 14].
• User interface and supervision. AI systems that can be instructed in natural language and act
  autonomously on the user’s behalf are more agentic [14]. In particular, systems that require less
  user supervision are more agentic [41, 4, 14]. We discuss the user supervision aspect in more detail
  in Section 5.2.
• System design: Systems that use design patterns such as tool use (e.g., web search, programming)
  or planning (e.g., reflection, subgoal decomposition) are more agentic [57, 38]. Systems whose
  control flow is driven by an LLM, and hence dynamic, are more agentic [57, 5].

2     AI agent evaluations must be cost-controlled
2.1   Maximizing accuracy can lead to unbounded cost

Calling language models repeatedly and taking a majority vote can lead to non-trivial increases in
accuracy across benchmarks like GSM-8K, MATH, Chess, and MMLU [26, 6, 48].
When the agent environment has easy signals to check if an answer is correct, repeatedly retrying
can lead to even more compelling performance gains [51]. Li et al. [27] showed that the accuracy


                                                   2
of AlphaCode increases from close to 0% zero-shot to over 15% with 1,000 retries and over 30%
with a million retries (accuracy is measured by how often one of the top 10 answers generated by
the model is correct). Thus, there is seemingly no limit to the amount of inference compute that can
increase accuracy, and increasing the generation budget has been shown to improve performance
in various applications [56]. Coding competitions often include signals of correctness, such as test
cases to check if a given solution is correct. Agent developers can keep sampling from an underlying
model until the solution passes the test cases. Our results below show that this is true for HumanEval.

2.2       Visualizing the accuracy-cost tradeoff using a Pareto curve

In the last year, many agents have been claimed to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on coding tasks.
But at what cost? To visualize the tradeoff, we re-evaluated the accuracy of three agents.
Specifically, we included agents from the HumanEval leaderboard on PapersWithCode that share
their code publicly [7]: LDB [64], LATS [65], and Reflexion [44]. 1 These agents rely on running the
code generated by the model, and if it fails the test cases provided with the problem description, they
try to debug the code [64], look at alternative paths in the code generation process [65], or “reflect”
on why the model’s outputs were incorrect before generating another solution [44, 65, 64].
We also evaluated the cost and time requirements of running these agents. In addition, we calculated
the accuracy, cost, and running time of a few simple baselines.

• GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models (zero shot; no agent architecture)
• Retry: We repeatedly invoke a model with the temperature set to zero, up to five times, if it fails
  the test cases provided with the problem description. Retrying makes sense because LLMs aren’t
  deterministic even at temperature zero (Appendix A.1).
• Warming: This is the same as the retry strategy, but we gradually increase the temperature of the
  underlying model with each run, from 0 to 0.5. This increases the stochasticity of the model and,
  we hope, increases the likelihood that at least one of the retries will succeed.
• Escalation: We start with a cheap model (Llama-3 8B) and escalate to more expensive models
  (GPT-3.5, Llama-3 70B, GPT-4) if we encounter a test case failure.

We use the modified benchmark version of HumanEval provided with the LDB paper [64] since
it includes example test cases for all 164 tasks (in the original benchmark, example test cases are
provided for only 161 of 164 tasks, as detailed in Section 6).

2.3       Two-dimensional evaluation yields surprising insights

Fig. 1 shows our main results for this section. Note that an agent is on the Pareto frontier if there
is no other agent that has significantly better performance on both dimensions simultaneously (see
Appendix A.1). 2
“State-of-the-art” agent architectures for HumanEval do not outperform simple baselines. There
is no significant accuracy difference between our warming strategy and the best-performing agent
architecture. In fact, we are not aware of any papers that compare their proposed agent architectures
with any of the last three of our simple baselines on HumanEval (retry, warming, escalation).3
Agents differ drastically in terms of cost. For substantially similar accuracy, the cost can differ by
almost two orders of magnitude. Yet, the cost of running these agents isn’t a top-line metric reported
in any of these papers. Reflexion and LDB cost over 50% more than the warming strategy, and LATS
over 50 times more (all these costs are entirely or predominantly from calls to GPT-4, so these ratios
      1
      Reflexion is absent from the PapersWithCode leaderboard, but it has a reported accuracy of 91% (higher
than any other agents with publicly available code apart from LDB and LATS), so we included it in our analysis.
AgentCoder, listed as the top-performing agent, did not include a link to the code on the benchmark at the time
of our analysis (late April 2024), nor did it include a link to the code in the paper, so we did not include it.
    2
      We constrain the Pareto frontier to be convex, because given two points a and b on the graph corresponding
to agents A and B, we can always linearly interpolate between them by creating a new agent that invokes A with
probability p and B with probability 1 − p. Hence, for instance, zero-shot GPT-4 is not on the frontier.
    3
      Chen et al. [6] do compare the effect of retrying the same model multiple times on HumanEval, but they do
not test the performance of GPT-4, nor do they argue for a specific complex agent architecture.


                                                       3
Figure 1: Our simple baselines offer Pareto improvements over SOTA agents. We run each agent five
times and report the mean accuracy and the mean total cost on the 164 HumanEval problems. Where
results for LDB have two models/agents in parenthesis, they indicate the language model or agent
used to generate the code, followed by the language model used to debug the code. Where they have
just one, they indicate that the same model was used to both generate the code and debug it. Note the
nonstandard axes; In Appendix A, we show our results with the full y-axis as well as error bars and
provide additional details. Robustness checks are contained in Appendix A.2. Section 4 explains why
we measure dollar costs instead of using proxies for cost such as the amount of compute used.


will be stable even if model costs change). Meanwhile, the escalation strategy strictly improves
accuracy while costing less than half of LDB (GPT-3.5).
Lack of evidence that System 2 approaches are responsible for performance gains. Since papers
proposing new agents haven’t adequately tested simple baselines, it has led to widespread beliefs
in the community that complex ideas like planning, reflection, and debugging are responsible for
accuracy gains. Based on our findings, the question of whether debugging, reflection, and other such
“System 2” approaches [22] are useful for code generation remains open, in line with other recent
findings [50, 18]. In addition, the over-optimism about System 2 approaches is exacerbated by a lack
of reproducibility and standardization that we report in Section 6. Failing to identify the sources of
empirical gains is a longstanding issue in ML and related fields [29, 16].
It is possible that System 2 techniques will be useful on harder programming tasks than those
represented in HumanEval, such as SWE-bench [21].
To summarize this section, useful agent evaluations must control for cost — even if we ultimately
don’t care about cost and only about identifying innovative agent designs. Accuracy alone cannot
identify progress because it can be improved by scientifically meaningless methods such as retrying.


3   Jointly optimizing cost and accuracy can yield better agent designs

Visualizing the cost and accuracy of agents as a Pareto frontier opens up a new space for agent
design: jointly optimizing cost and accuracy, which can lead to agents that cost less while maintaining
accuracy. This formalization is fully generalizable to other desiderata of agent design, such as latency.
The total cost of running an agent includes fixed and variable costs. Fixed costs are one-time expenses
incurred when optimizing the agent’s hyperparameters (temperate, prompt, etc.) for a given task.
Variable costs are incurred each time the agent is run and depend on the number of input and output
tokens. The more an agent is used, the more the variable cost dominates (Appendix B).


                                                   4
Joint optimization allows us to trade off the fixed and variable costs of running an agent. By spending
more upfront on the one-time optimization of agent design, we can reduce the variable cost of running
an agent (e.g., by finding shorter prompts and few-shot examples while maintaining accuracy).
As an illustration of the potential of joint optimization, we modify the DSPy framework [24] and
evaluate it on the HotPotQA benchmark [60]. We chose HotPotQA because is one of the benchmarks
used to illustrate the effectiveness of DSPy in the original paper and has been featured in several
official tutorials by the developers. We used the Optuna hyperparameter optimization framework [2]
to search for few-shot examples to be included with an agent that minimizes cost while maintaining
accuracy. Note that we expect more complex joint optimization approaches to vastly outperform
our approach. Our results are only a starting point intended illustrate the vast, underexplored design
space in agent design enabled by joint optimization.

3.1   HotPotQA evaluation setup

We implement several agent designs to evaluate performance on multi-hop question-answering
using DSPy. For retrieval, we use ColBERTv2 to query Wikipedia based on the HotPotQA task
specification [60]. Performance is evaluated by comparing whether the agent successfully retrieved all
ground-truth documents that are part of the HotPotQA task. We use 100 samples from the HotPotQA
training set to optimize the DSPy pipelines and 200 samples from the evaluation set to evaluate the
results (this is consistent with the implementation of the DSPy pipelines provided by the developers
to illustrate efficacy at multi-hop retrieval). We evaluate five agent architectures:

• Uncompiled: We do not optimize the agent’s prompt or include instructions on formatting Hot-
  PotQA queries. Each prompt only contains the instructions for the task and the main content (i.e.,
  question, context, reasoning) but no few-shot examples or formatting instructions.
• Formatting instructions only: This is the same as the uncompiled baseline, but we add instructions
  on how to format generated outputs for writing retrieval queries.
• Few-shot: We use DSPy to identify effective few-shot examples using all 100 samples from
  the training set. We include formatting instructions. Few-shot examples are selected based on
  successful predictions generated on the training set.
• Random Search: We use DSPy’s random search optimizer on a subset of the training data (50 of
  100 samples) to select the best few-shot examples based on its performance on the remaining 50
  samples. We include formatting instructions.
• Joint optimization: We iterate over half the training set (50 of 100 samples) to collect a set of
  candidate few-shot examples that improve the model’s accuracy. We use the other 50 samples
  for validation. We jointly maximize accuracy and minimize the number of tokens in the few-shot
  examples included in the prompt using parameter search. We implement parameter search using
  Optuna [2]. We search over the following parameters to find Pareto-optimal agent designs: (a)
  the temperature for each module within the agent, (b) the number of few-shot examples, (c) the
  selection of specific examples, and (d) whether to add formatting instructions. Of the candidate
  agents selected by Optuna, we pick the one with the best accuracy on the development set as our
  joint optimization model.

We test all five of the above agent designs on two underlying models: Llama-3-70B and GPT-3.5.

3.2   HotPotQA results: Joint optimization reduces cost while maintaining accuracy

Fig. 2 shows our main results. We confirm that DSPy offers substantial accuracy improvements over
uncompiled baselines, but we find that this comes at a cost. Fortunately, we can mitigate the cost
overhead — for GPT-3.5, joint optimization leads to 53% lower variable cost with similar accuracy
compared to both default DSPy implementations. Similarly, for Llama-3-70B, it leads to a 41% lower
cost while maintaining accuracy.
Tradeoffs between fixed and variable costs for agent design. Our joint optimization formulation
provides a way to trade off fixed and variable costs (Appendix B). In particular, we find that if used
for HotPotQA tasks, the Llama-3-70B as well as the GPT-3.5 joint optimization model both become
cheaper (in terms of total cost) compared to the default DSPy implementation, after 1,350 tasks


                                                  5
                                                          Figure 2: Joint optimization maintains accu-
                                                          racy while significantly reducing cost. All
                                                          measurements are averages of 5 runs on the
                                                          test set. A figure with error bars and other de-
                                                          tails about our empirical results are included
                                                          in Appendix B. Note that DSPy has a much
                                                          higher cost than our baseline agent designs
                                                          since it always includes up to 8 few-shot
                                                          examples per prompt (the number being a
                                                          configurable parameter) without optimizing
                                                          for cost, whereas the baseline agents include
                                                          none, and joint optimization uses a variable
                                                          number of examples.



(Appendix B). For agents used in large-scale real-world tasks, the variable cost is by far the dominant
term compared to the fixed cost, by orders of magnitude, as an agent might be used millions of times.
In summary, joint optimization allows for efficient agent design. This comes at a small fixed cost for
optimizing the design, which is insignificant if the agent is used thousands of times.


4   Model and downstream developers have distinct benchmarking needs

AI evaluations are used by model developers and AI researchers to identify which changes to
the training data and architecture improve accuracy (model evaluation) and also by downstream
developers to decide which AI systems to use in their products for procurement decisions (downstream
evaluation). The difference between model evaluation and downstream evaluation is underappreciated.
This has led to much confusion about how to factor in the cost of running AI.
Model evaluation is a scientific question of interest to researchers. Here, it makes sense to stay away
from dollar costs, because reporting costs breaks many properties of benchmarks that we take for
granted: measurements don’t change over time (whereas costs tend to come down) and different
models compete on a level playing field (whereas some developers may benefit from economies of
scale, leading to lower inference costs). Because of this, researchers usually pick a different axis for
the Pareto curve, such as parameter count or the amount of compute used to train a model.
For model evaluation, controlling for compute is a reasonable approach: if we normalize the amount
of compute used to train a model, we can then understand if factors like architectural changes or
changes in the data composition are responsible for improvements, as opposed to more compute [25].
Downstream evaluation is an engineering question that helps inform a procurement decision of
which model or agent to use in a particular application. Here, cost is the actual construct of interest.
The downsides of cost measurement in model evaluation are exactly what is needed for downstream
evaluation. Namely, inference costs do come down over time, and that greatly matters to downstream
developers. It is unnecessary and counterproductive for the evaluation to stay frozen in time.
Proxies for cost are misleading for downstream evaluation. In the context of downstream eval-
uation, proxies for cost (such as the number of active parameters or amount of compute used) are
misleading. For example, Mistral released a figure alongside their latest model, Mixtral 8x22B,
to explain why developers should choose it over competitors [34]. It used the number of active
parameters as a proxy for cost. From the perspective of a downstream developer, this proxy is
misleading. For example, as of June 2024, Mixtral 8x7B costs twice as much as Llama 2 13B on
compute provider Anyscale. Yet Mistral’s figure shows that it costs about the same because it only
considers the number of active parameters.
Downstream developers don’t care about the number of active parameters when they’re using an API.
They simply care about the dollar cost relative to accuracy. Mistral chose “active parameters” as
a proxy, presumably because it makes their models look better than dense models such as Meta’s
Llama and Cohere’s Command R+. If every model developer picked a proxy that makes their model
look good, multi-dimensional evaluation would lose its usefulness.


                                                   6
Addressing challenges to cost evaluation. As discussed above, there are several hurdles to cost
evaluation. Different providers can charge different amounts for the same model, the cost of an
API call might change overnight, and cost might vary based on model developer decisions, such as
whether bulk API calls are charged differently.
These downsides can be partly addressed by making the evaluation results customizable using
mechanisms to adjust the cost of running models, i.e., providing users the option to adjust the cost
of input and output tokens for their provider of choice to recalculate the tradeoff between cost and
accuracy. In turn, downstream evaluations of agents should include input/output token counts in
addition to dollar costs, so that anyone looking at the evaluation in the future can instantly recalculate
the cost using current prices. We have prototyped a simple example of such an interface.4

4.1        Implications for benchmark design using a case study of NovelQA

The difference between model and downstream evaluation can also lead to challenges in benchmark
design. We show how such challenges arise with a case study of the NovelQA benchmark [53].
The benchmark is motivated by the need to evaluate language models with long context windows.
Novel lengths in the benchmark range from 50,000 to over a million words. Each novel has between
5 and 100 questions about it. To evaluate an AI system on NovelQA, developers submit their
model responses to benchmark questions to a centralized platform (CodaBench), and top-performing
submissions are included in a public leaderboard.
This is a good benchmark for model evaluation, but it would be misleading if used for downstream
evaluation by a developer looking to build a bot for answering questions about novels. Like the other
benchmarks we have discussed, the NovelQA leaderboard does not measure cost. Nor is it easy to
construct such a leaderboard. That’s because NovelQA evaluates language models by asking all
questions about a novel in one go, right after inputting the novel’s content. However, this does not
represent how users would ask questions about novels in practice. Even if users have many questions
about a novel, they will likely ask them individually rather than all at once. Such sequential queries
would cost orders of magnitude more because the novel has to be re-processed each time. In other
words, the task of answering multiple questions about a novel (as implemented by NovelQA) doesn’t
tell us anything about the cost of asking questions sequentially.
In particular, when comparing the two main approaches to novel-based QA — long-context models
and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) — NovelQA makes RAG look much worse than it is in
a real-world scenario. Specifically, we found that the two approaches are roughly equally accurate,
with RAG costing more than 20 times less (Table A5). But on NovelQA, RAG costs half as much (a
tenfold overestimate). As a result, the NovelQA leaderboard is misleading for downstream evaluation.
Although NovelQA authors don’t claim otherwise, in general it is common for downstream developers
to look to model evaluation benchmarks. Instead, we argue that downstream evaluation benchmarks
must be separate from, or at least variants of, model evaluation benchmarks.

5         Agent benchmarks allow shortcuts
Benchmarks are useful if they give us an estimate of real-world accuracy. If a benchmark allows
shortcuts, accuracy on the benchmark does not translate to the real world [32, 33, 52].
Overfitting is one prominent type of shortcut, and a serious problem for agent benchmarks, since
they tend to be small — typically a few hundred samples. This is a much more serious problem than
LLM training data contamination, as knowledge of test samples can be directly programmed into the
agent as opposed to merely being exposed to them during training. In principle, a lookup table can
achieve 100% accuracy on many agent benchmarks. Overfitting would be obvious to spot if an agent
used a lookup table, but other types of overfitting can be much more subtle and hard to detect, which
is of course why held-out test sets are crucial in machine learning. Yet, surprisingly, we find that
many agent benchmarks do not include held-out test sets. In addition to creating a test set, benchmark
developers should consider keeping it secret to prevent LLM contamination or agent overfitting.
But we can go further. What about overfitting to a task? For example, if an agent scores highly
on a Python programming benchmark but cannot program in any other language, is it a problem?
      4
          See: https://benediktstroebl.github.io/agent-eval-webapp/


                                                    7
This depends entirely on the agent’s purpose and what the benchmark creator desires in terms of the
generality of the agent [10, 35]. In our survey, we have found four levels of generality:
1. Distribution-specific benchmarks are limited to a specific task, such as U.S. grade school math
   problems, and do not account for distribution shifts.
2. Task-specific benchmarks are limited to a specific task such as booking a flight, placing an order
   on an e-commerce website [61], or solving a GitHub issue [21], and account for the possibility of
   distribution shifts, including drift. After all, an agent that can book flights today but breaks if the
   flight booking website change its layout would not be very useful.
3. Domain-general benchmarks aim to measure the ability to perform any task in a specific domain,
   such as web browsing or tool use [66].
4. General-purpose benchmarks measure the accuracy of agents across different domains, such
   as the same agent being able to perform web browsing and robotics tasks. It is unclear if such
   benchmarks are necessary or if aggregating domain-general benchmarks can better serve the
   purpose.
We propose as a core principle that the more general the intended generality of the agent, the more the
held-out set should differ from the training set, as detailed in Table 1. For example, if a benchmark is
intended to be domain-general but doesn’t contain held-out tasks, agent developers may (intentionally
or unintentionally) take shortcuts that work only for the specific tasks represented in the dataset,
resulting in agents that don’t work well for other tasks in the domain. Benchmark developers must do
their best to ensure that shortcuts are impossible. We view this as the responsibility of benchmark
developers rather than agent developers, because designing benchmarks that don’t allow shortcuts is
much easier than checking every single agent to see if it takes shortcuts. Benchmarks that create a
level playing field are the core reason for the rapid progress of ML over the last half century [12, 46].

        Level of generality      What should be held out         Num. benchmarks with
                                                                  appropriate holdouts
       Distribution-specific   In-distribution samples                    1/1
       Task-specific           Out-of-distribution samples                3/6
       Domain-general          Tasks                                      1/8
       Fully general           Domains                                    0/2
     Table 1: Appropriate holdouts based on level of generality. See Appendix for full details.

There are many types of distribution shifts, and benchmark developers can’t necessarily model all of
them. But they must attempt to identify which distribution shifts are particularly likely for the task in
question. Another approach — not always practical — is to evaluate sim2real transfer, where leading
agents are evaluated not just on benchmark tasks but also the corresponding real-world tasks — for
example, Amazon shopping for a web shopping benchmark [61].
We analyzed 17 agent benchmarks into the four levels of generality (Table A4). Most are either task-
specific or domain-general. In many cases, it wasn’t clear which level of generality the benchmark
developers had in mind, and we made our best guess based on how it was presented in the paper. This
lack of clarity is problematic as it makes it hard to know what we can and can’t conclude about the
agents that perform well on that benchmark.
We recognize that time and resource constraints may hinder benchmark designers from creating a
holdout set at the correct generality level. Hence we count a holdout as appropriate if there actually
exists a holdout at the appropriate level of generality or the benchmark designers indicate intent to
create such a holdout. However, as shown in Table 1 and Appendix C, the majority of benchmarks do
not include an appropriate held-out set, including 7 that have no hold-out and no indication that a
holdout set will be added in future editions of the benchmark.
Note that in traditional machine learning research, held-out test sets are usually at the level of
in-distribution or out-of-distribution samples (the first two rows of the Table 1). This is sufficient
because models are specific to a single task, say image classification or spam classification. But
LLMs and domain-general agents are expected to handle tasks that are not known ahead of time and
may be specified in natural language in some cases. This motivates the need for held-out tasks during
evaluation.


                                                    8
5.1   Case study of the STeP agent on WebArena.

Web agents can be evaluated on many capabilities: navigating to a website, scrolling, selecting the
right web element etc. There are many different types of websites that can be used such benchmarks:
e-commerce, social media, information search etc. WebArena is an agent benchmark that aims
to evaluate agents on tasks on the web [66]. It includes clones of six different websites (GitLab,
Reddit, Wikipedia, OpenStreetMaps, an e-commerce platform, and a content management system)
and two tools (calculator and scratchpad). It has 812 different tasks that involve interacting with these
websites, such as “find the address of all US international airports that are within a driving distance
of 60 km to the Niagara Falls” and “post a question on a subreddit related to New York City”.
WebArena’s core stated selling point seems to be realism, which means that it should be difficult to
find shortcuts. If we consider WebArena a task-specific benchmark, the key type of distribution shift
is drift: agents should be robust to changes made to a website over time. However, WebArena does
not model drift.
To be clear, it is challenging to model drift. Benchmark developers would need to find changes
made to published websites and incorporate those into the test sets. Further, as we discuss above,
the held-out set would need to be kept secret, since agent developers could otherwise overfit to the
specific changes in the benchmark. Still, we view these steps as necessary for meaningful evaluation.
Consider the top agent on the WebArena leaderboard, called STeP [47]. It has an accuracy of 35.8%,
more than double the accuracy of the top-performing baseline agent introduced in the WebArena
paper, and over 10 percentage points more than the next-best agent [13]. How does STeP achieve this
high accuracy?
It turns out that STeP hardcodes policies to solve the specific tasks included in WebArena. For
example, several WebArena Reddit tasks involve navigating to a user’s profile. The STeP policy
for this task is to look at the current base URL and add a suffix ‘/user/user_name’.
This is brittle: the policy would no longer be effective if the website updates its URL structure (an
example of drift). Even if the probability of an individual policy failing is small, an agent might need
to call different policies dozens of times for each task. The overall probability of failure compounds
quickly.
To be clear, the STeP developers’ goals are orthogonal to the benchmark developers’ goals—creating
composable policies for accomplishing fixed tasks that are known apriori. From this perspective,
STeP’s design choices make sense
Yet the leaderboard accuracy on WebArena (such as the accuracy of the STeP agent) is misleading
from the perspective of downstream developers, who might be using the WebArena leaderboard to
understand the accuracy of web agents on real-world tasks and make decisions about which agent to
adopt in an application.
Things become even more problematic if we consider WebArena a domain-general benchmark.
This can be justified based on the claim that for previous web benchmarks, “the functionality of
many environments is a limited version of their real-world counterparts, leading to a lack of task
diversity” [66]. This suggests that the WebArena developers aim to stimulate the development of
agents that can accomplish many different tasks on the web.
Unfortunately, WebArena lacks a held-out test set for evaluating whether an agent can perform well
on unseen web tasks. (It is hard to confirm if building a domain-general benchmark is indeed their
main objective. This lack of clarity is problematic as it makes it hard to assess whether benchmark
developers deliver on their promises and what the leaderboard accuracy truly reflects.)
Note that if the held-out set contained different tasks (such as samples from completely new and
unseen websites) compared to those in the training set, the accuracy agents like STeP would be
drastically lower, because none of the hardcoded policies would be effective.

5.2   Agent benchmarks don’t account for humans in the loop

The degree of human supervision, feedback, and intervention required for an agent to perform a task
can be seen as a spectrum. Consider a data analysis task. On one end of the spectrum, the analyst
might use a chatbot to help with tasks like debugging. Here the user is firmly in control and verifies
all chatbot outputs. Or the analyst might ask the agent to write and execute code for certain data


                                                   9
visualization tasks. The analyst might not review every line of code but only intervene if something
appears to be wrong. At the other extreme, an analyst might give the agent a dataset and a task (e.g.
identify how the presence of a swimming pool impacts property value using a home sale database),
giving it full autonomy over all aspects of the task such as how to perform causal inference.
Current evaluations predominantly focus on these two extremes: they either evaluate the capacity of
chatbots to answer questions correctly (e.g., MMLU [17]), or whether agents can perform a task with
no supervision (e.g., the agent benchmarks in Table A4).
However, these evaluations do not reflect how people use chatbots and agents in the real world. For
example, the humans using a chatbot might steer it towards the correct answer, give feedback on
where it went wrong, or ask it to change something about the output. Similarly, an agent might have
the capacity to take an action, but require user confirmation for consequential actions. For example,
users read emails using ChatGPT’s Zapier plugin by connecting their email accounts, but sending an
email requires confirmation from the end user.
Human feedback might greatly increase accuracy. For example, Shi et al. [43] find that simple
feedback increases the performance of GPT-4 from 0% to over 86% on challenging programming
problems—from entirely useless to almost perfect. Thus, the lack of human-in-the-loop evaluation of
agents might lead us to underestimate their usefulness (whereas the lack of held-out test sets leads to
overoptimism).
Of course, human-in-the-loop evaluation is costly and tricky. The agent’s accuracy will depend not
just on the system but also on the skill level of humans interacting with it. Despite these limitations,
it is an important direction for future research. Ibrahim et al. [20] provide a detailed overview of
implementing such evaluations in the context of safety evaluation.

6   Inadequate benchmark standardization leads to irreproducible agent
    evaluations

During our experiments, we identified several shortcomings in the reproducibility and standardization
of agent benchmarks and evaluations. Our analysis is based on a widely accepted definition of
reproducibility: that the code and data accompanying a paper should be enough to reproduce the
results that it reports [37]. Without reproducible agent evaluation, it is hard to distinguish genuine
improvements in agent designs from artifacts of the differences in evaluation choices. Since agents are
often intended to be used by downstream developers, lack of reproducibility also misleads developers
adopting agents in real-world applications. Finally, irreproducible results impose a huge time cost on
researchers trying to build on claims of state-of-the-art results.
We identified five root causes for the lack of standardized and reproducible agent evaluations, all of
which arise from the differences between LLM evaluation and agent evaluation. Since these issues
relate to standardization, we view them as primarily the responsibility of benchmark developers rather
than agent developers.

1. Evaluation scripts make assumptions about agent design that aren’t satisfied by all agents.
   Many evaluation shortcomings result from the lack of a clear standard for releasing evaluation
   scripts alongside benchmarks [3]. Agent developers need to implement their own evaluation
   for their agents either because the evaluation script does not account for different agent designs
   or because the script provided by the benchmark developer itself has bugs. This leaves open
   the possibility for non-standard evaluation scripts leading to incomparable results across agent
   developers evaluating their agents on the same benchmark.
2. Repurposing LLM evaluation benchmarks for agent evaluation introduces inconsistencies.
   In some cases, even if benchmark developers provide evaluation scripts, agent developers need to
   re-implement these scripts. This is because many prominent benchmarks have been designed for
   language model evaluation. Using these benchmarks to evaluate agents can require changes to the
   benchmark design and evaluation.
   For example, HumanEval does not include example test cases for 3 of the 164 problems. In
   addition, the example test cases are included in the docstring accompanying a problem, rather
   than being machine readable and easily extractable. Both of these design choices are suitable for
   evaluating language models, since models can be evaluated by prompting them with the included


                                                  10
    docstrings, even if there are no example test cases. But this benchmark design does not work
    for agents that rely on using the included example test cases and regenerate solutions if they are
    incorrect (such as LDB, Reflexion, LATS, and our simple baselines in Section 2). As a result,
    developers evaluate agents using varying subsets of benchmarks or adding example test cases to
    the original benchmark. For example, the Reflexion [44] and LATS [65] modified HumanEval by
    removing the problems without example tests. LDB [64] added example tests to the 3 problems
    which did not originally include them and convert examples to a machine-readable format (we
    use the version provided by the authors of LDB). But agent and model evaluations are clubbed
    together on leaderboard websites such as PapersWithCode, despite the varying evaluation methods.
    Aggregators of benchmark results (such as PapersWithCode) must ensure that evaluations on the
    same leaderboard were all conducted using the same methods.
3. The high cost of evaluating agents makes it is hard to estimate confidence intervals. Agents
   might call the underlying language models hundreds (or thousands) of times. This means that
   evaluating agents can be extremely expensive. For example, SWE-bench [21] consists of over
   2,000 programming tasks. The authors of SWE-Agent [59] set a cost limit of USD 4 per task.
   Evaluating SWE-Agent on the entire benchmark could cost over USD 8,000 for a single evaluation
   run. The high cost makes it infeasible to run evaluations multiple times, and perhaps as a result,
   agent evaluations are rarely accompanied by error bars. This makes it hard to understand the
   variance of reported results. We found that many reported accuracy scores were above the
   maximum of five runs that we performed in our reproduction attempts, and the reported baselines
   were in some cases lower than the minimum of five runs we performed.
4. Agent evaluation relies on external factors such as interacting with an environment which
   can lead to subtle errors. LLM benchmarks typically consist of input strings and rely on strings
   as outputs, whereas agents often involve dynamic interactions with environments such as the web
   or a command line, which are not easily reducible to static inputs and outputs. This can lead to
   incorrect assumptions. For example, one common assumption in evaluation is invariance to the
   order in which tasks in a benchmark are evaluated, as tasks are presumed to be independent. This
   assumption fails for WebArena [66]. One of the websites included in the benchmark (a clone of
   Reddit) has rate limits for certain agent actions, such as posting content. As a result, if the tasks
   involving Reddit posts are evaluated one after another, they are much more likely to fail. This
   affects the evaluation of the STeP agent [47].
5. The lack of standardized evaluation leads to subtle bugs in agent evaluation and development.
   Perhaps due to the issues above, we encountered several bugs with agent developers’ implementa-
   tion of their agents and their evaluations. For example, both LATS [65] and STeP [47] marked
   some incorrectly completed tasks as correct. Similarly, both agents removed a small number of
   tasks from the benchmark (1 and 8 tasks for LATS and STeP respectively).

The need for a standardized evaluation framework. These shortcomings stem from three distinct
(but related) reasons. First, as of yet, there are no clear standards for providing agent evaluation
scripts (shortcoming 1). As a result, the differences between model and agent benchmarks are not
appreciated (shortcomings 1-3). Finally, due to the lack of community norms on evaluation, there is
scope for bugs to creep in during agent development and evaluation (shortcoming 5). We include
examples and more details on each in Table A6. Shortcomings with standardization have also been
observed for LLM evaluation. Evaluation frameworks like HELM [28] and LM Evaluation Harness
[3] address these shortcomings for model evaluations by providing standardized evaluation results.
But as we have seen, these frameworks don’t suffice for evaluating AI agents. Developing an agent
evaluation framework is a ripe area for future work.


7    Conclusion

AI agent benchmarking is new and best practices haven’t yet been established, making it hard to
distinguish genuine advances from hype. Our thesis is that agents are sufficiently different from
models that benchmarking practices need to be rethought. We have taken the first steps toward a
principled approach to agent benchmarking, resulting in recommendations including cost-controlled
comparisons, separating model and downstream evaluation, preventing shortcuts using appropriate
hold-outs, and greater standardization of evaluation practices. We hope these steps will raise the rigor
of AI agent evaluation and provide a firm foundation for progress.


                                                  11
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
We thank Rishi Bommasani, Rumman Chowdhury, Omar Khattab, Percy Liang, Shayne Longpre,
Yifan Mai, Morgan McGuire, Matt Salganik, Hailey Schoelkopf, and Venia Veselovsky for discussions
and inputs that informed our analysis. We are grateful to the authors of the papers we engage with for
their quick responses and for sharing their code, which makes such reproduction analysis possible in
the first place. In particular, we are grateful to Karthik Narasimhan (Reflexion), Paloma Sodhi and
Yoav Artzi (STeP), Cunxiang Wang and Ruoxi Ning (NovelQA), Zilong Wang (LDB), and Andy Zhou
(LATS), who gave us feedback in response to a draft of this paper. We acknowledge compute support
from Princeton University’s Center for Statistics and Machine Learning and OpenAI’s researcher
access program.

References
 [1] Mohamed Aghzal, Erion Plaku, and Ziyu Yao. Can Large Language Models be Good Path
     Planners? A Benchmark and Investigation on Spatial-temporal Reasoning, February 2024. URL
     http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03249. arXiv:2310.03249 [cs].
 [2] Takuya Akiba, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. Optuna:
     A Next-generation Hyperparameter Optimization Framework. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
     SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD ’19, pages
     2623–2631, New York, NY, USA, July 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
     978-1-4503-6201-6. doi: 10.1145/3292500.3330701. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.
     1145/3292500.3330701.
 [3] Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Lintang Sutawika, Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi,
     Alham Fikri Aji, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Sidney Black, Jordan Clive, Anthony DiPofi,
     Julen Etxaniz, Benjamin Fattori, Jessica Zosa Forde, Charles Foster, Jeffrey Hsu, Mimansa
     Jaiswal, Wilson Y. Lee, Haonan Li, Charles Lovering, Niklas Muennighoff, Ellie Pavlick, Jason
     Phang, Aviya Skowron, Samson Tan, Xiangru Tang, Kevin A. Wang, Genta Indra Winata,
     François Yvon, and Andy Zou. Lessons from the Trenches on Reproducible Evaluation of Lan-
     guage Models, May 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14782. arXiv:2405.14782
     [cs].
 [4] Alan Chan, Rebecca Salganik, Alva Markelius, Chris Pang, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Dmitrii
     Krasheninnikov, Lauro Langosco, Zhonghao He, Yawen Duan, Micah Carroll, Michelle Lin,
     Alex Mayhew, Katherine Collins, Maryam Molamohammadi, John Burden, Wanru Zhao,
     Shalaleh Rismani, Konstantinos Voudouris, Umang Bhatt, Adrian Weller, David Krueger, and
     Tegan Maharaj. Harms from Increasingly Agentic Algorithmic Systems. In Proceedings of
     the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’23, pages
     651–666, New York, NY, USA, June 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
     9798400701924. doi: 10.1145/3593013.3594033. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.
     1145/3593013.3594033.
 [5] Harrison Chase. What is an agent? https://blog.langchain.dev/what-is-an-agent/,
     2024. LangChain blog, Jun 28, 2024.
 [6] Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Boris Hanin, Peter Bailis, Ion Stoica, Matei Zaharia, and
     James Zou. Are More LLM Calls All You Need? Towards Scaling Laws of Compound Inference
     Systems, March 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.02419. arXiv:2403.02419 [cs,
     eess].
 [7] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto,
     Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul
     Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke
     Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad
     Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias
     Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex
     Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain,
     William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant
     Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie


                                                 12
     Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and
     Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code, July 2021. URL
     http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374. arXiv:2107.03374 [cs].
 [8] Ching-An Cheng, Andrey Kolobov, Dipendra Misra, Allen Nie, and Adith Swaminathan. LLF-
     Bench: Benchmark for Interactive Learning from Language Feedback, December 2023. URL
     http://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06853. arXiv:2312.06853 [cs].
 [9] Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan
     Saharia, Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. BabyAI: A Platform to Study the Sample
     Efficiency of Grounded Language Learning, December 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
     1810.08272. arXiv:1810.08272 [cs].
[10] François Chollet. On the Measure of Intelligence, November 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/
     abs/1911.01547. arXiv:1911.01547 [cs].
[11] Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Samuel Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and
     Yu Su. MIND2WEB: Towards a Generalist Agent for the Web.
[12] David Donoho. 50 Years of Data Science. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics,
     26(4):745–766, October 2017. ISSN 1061-8600. doi: 10.1080/10618600.2017.1384734.
     URL https://doi.org/10.1080/10618600.2017.1384734. Publisher: Taylor & Francis
     _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/10618600.2017.1384734.
[13] Alexandre Drouin, Maxime Gasse, Massimo Caccia, Issam H. Laradji, Manuel Del Verme, Tom
     Marty, Léo Boisvert, Megh Thakkar, Quentin Cappart, David Vazquez, Nicolas Chapados, and
     Alexandre Lacoste. WorkArena: How Capable Are Web Agents at Solving Common Knowledge
     Work Tasks?, April 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07718. arXiv:2403.07718
     [cs].
[14] Iason Gabriel, Arianna Manzini, Geoff Keeling, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Verena Rieser, Hasan
     Iqbal, Nenad Tomašev, Ira Ktena, Zachary Kenton, Mikel Rodriguez, Seliem El-Sayed, Sasha
     Brown, Canfer Akbulut, Andrew Trask, Edward Hughes, A. Stevie Bergman, Renee Shelby,
     Nahema Marchal, Conor Griffin, Juan Mateos-Garcia, Laura Weidinger, Winnie Street, Ben-
     jamin Lange, Alex Ingerman, Alison Lentz, Reed Enger, Andrew Barakat, Victoria Krakovna,
     John Oliver Siy, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Amanda McCroskery, Vijay Bolina, Harry Law, Murray
     Shanahan, Lize Alberts, Borja Balle, Sarah de Haas, Yetunde Ibitoye, Allan Dafoe, Beth
     Goldberg, Sébastien Krier, Alexander Reese, Sims Witherspoon, Will Hawkins, Maribeth
     Rauh, Don Wallace, Matija Franklin, Josh A. Goldstein, Joel Lehman, Michael Klenk, Shan-
     non Vallor, Courtney Biles, Meredith Ringel Morris, Helen King, Blaise Agüera y Arcas,
     William Isaac, and James Manyika. The Ethics of Advanced AI Assistants, April 2024. URL
     http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.16244. arXiv:2404.16244 [cs].
[15] Matthew Hausknecht, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Xingdi Yuan. Inter-
     active Fiction Games: A Colossal Adventure. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, 34(05):7903–7910, April 2020. ISSN 2374-3468. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i05.6297.
     URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/6297. Number: 05.
[16] Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David
     Meger. Deep Reinforcement Learning That Matters. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
     Artificial Intelligence, 32(1), April 2018. ISSN 2374-3468. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11694.
     URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/11694. Number: 1.
[17] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
     Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring Massive Multitask Language Understanding, January 2021. URL
     http://arxiv.org/abs/2009.03300. arXiv:2009.03300 [cs].
[18] Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xinying
     Song, and Denny Zhou. Large Language Models Cannot Self-Correct Reasoning Yet. October
     2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=IkmD3fKBPQ.
[19] Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. MLAgentBench: Evaluating Language
     Agents on Machine Learning Experimentation, April 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
     2310.03302. arXiv:2310.03302 [cs].


                                               13
[20] Lujain Ibrahim, Saffron Huang, Lama Ahmad, and Markus Anderljung. Beyond static AI
     evaluations: advancing human interaction evaluations for LLM harms and risks, May 2024.
     URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10632. arXiv:2405.10632 [cs].
[21] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
     Karthik Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues?,
     October 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06770v1.
[22] Subbarao Kambhampati, Karthik Valmeekam, Lin Guan, Kaya Stechly, Mudit Verma, Siddhant
     Bhambri, Lucas Saldyt, and Anil Murthy. LLMs Can’t Plan, But Can Help Planning in
     LLM-Modulo Frameworks, February 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01817.
     arXiv:2402.01817 [cs].
[23] Omar Khattab, Christopher Potts, and Matei Zaharia. Baleen: Robust Multi-Hop
     Reasoning at Scale via Condensed Retrieval.    In Advances in Neural Informa-
     tion Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 27670–27682. Curran Associates, Inc.,
     2021.    URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/hash/
     e8b1cbd05f6e6a358a81dee52493dd06-Abstract.html.
[24] Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri
     Vardhamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller,
     Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. DSPy: Compiling Declarative Language Model Calls
     into Self-Improving Pipelines, October 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03714.
     arXiv:2310.03714 [cs].
[25] Nathan Lambert. The end of the “best open LLM”, April 2024. URL https://www.
     interconnects.ai/p/compute-efficient-open-llms.
[26] Junyou Li, Qin Zhang, Yangbin Yu, Qiang Fu, and Deheng Ye. More Agents Is All You Need,
     February 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05120. arXiv:2402.05120 [cs].
[27] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond,
     Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy,
     Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl,
     Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson,
     Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. Competition-Level
     Code Generation with AlphaCode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, December 2022. ISSN
     0036-8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.abq1158. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.
     07814. arXiv:2203.07814 [cs].
[28] Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga,
     Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang
     Yuan, Bobby Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Cosgrove, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Ré,
     Diana Acosta-Navas, Drew A. Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda
     Rong, Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu Yao, Jue Wang, Keshav Santhanam, Laurel Orr, Lucia Zheng,
     Mert Yuksekgonul, Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri Chatterji, Omar Khattab,
     Peter Henderson, Qian Huang, Ryan Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya Ganguli,
     Tatsunori Hashimoto, Thomas Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang, Xuechen
     Li, Yifan Mai, Yuhui Zhang, and Yuta Koreeda. Holistic Evaluation of Language Models,
     October 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.09110. arXiv:2211.09110 [cs].
[29] Zachary C. Lipton and Jacob Steinhardt. Troubling Trends in Machine Learning Scholarship,
     July 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.03341. arXiv:1807.03341 [cs, stat].
[30] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang
     Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao
     Du, Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao
     Dong, and Jie Tang. AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as Agents, October 2023. URL http:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2308.03688. arXiv:2308.03688 [cs].
[31] Chang Ma, Junlei Zhang, Zhihao Zhu, Cheng Yang, Yujiu Yang, Yaohui Jin, Zhenzhong Lan,
     Lingpeng Kong, and Junxian He. AgentBoard: An Analytical Evaluation Board of Multi-turn
     LLM Agents, January 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13178. arXiv:2401.13178
     [cs].


                                              14
[32] Timothy R. McIntosh, Teo Susnjak, Tong Liu, Paul Watters, and Malka N. Halgamuge. Inade-
     quacies of Large Language Model Benchmarks in the Era of Generative Artificial Intelligence,
     February 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09880. arXiv:2402.09880 [cs].

[33] Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Craig Swift, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas
     Scialom. GAIA: a benchmark for General AI Assistants, November 2023. URL http:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2311.12983. arXiv:2311.12983 [cs].

[34] Mistral AI team. Cheaper, Better, Faster, Stronger, April 2024. URL https://mistral.ai/
     news/mixtral-8x22b/. Section: news.

[35] Meredith Ringel Morris, Jascha Sohl-dickstein, Noah Fiedel, Tris Warkentin, Allan Dafoe, Alek-
     sandra Faust, Clement Farabet, and Shane Legg. Levels of AGI for Operationalizing Progress on
     the Path to AGI, June 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.02462. arXiv:2311.02462
     [cs].

[36] Silen Naihin. agbenchmark: Benchmarking the performance of agents far and wide, regardless
     of how they are set up and how they work.

[37] National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Reproducibility and Replicability
     in Science. 2019. doi: 10.17226/25303. URL https://nap.nationalacademies.org/
     read/25303/chapter/7.

[38] Andrew Ng.        Welcoming Diverse Approaches Keeps Machine Learning
     Strong,  June 2024.        URL https://www.deeplearning.ai/the-batch/
     welcoming-diverse-approaches-keeps-machine-learning-strong/.

[39] Yangjun Ruan, Honghua Dong, Andrew Wang, Silviu Pitis, Yongchao Zhou, Jimmy Ba, Yann
     Dubois, Chris J. Maddison, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Identifying the Risks of LM Agents
     with an LM-Emulated Sandbox, May 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.15817.
     arXiv:2309.15817 [cs].

[40] Stuart Jonathan Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Prentice
     Hall, 1 edition, 1995. ISBN 978-0-13-103805-9. Google-Books-ID: CUVeMwAACAAJ.

[41] Yonadav Shavit, Cullen O’Keefe, Tyna Eloundou, Paul McMillan, Sandhini Agarwal, Miles
     Brundage, Steven Adler, Rosie Campbell, Teddy Lee, Pamela Mishkin, Alan Hickey, Katarina
     Slama, Lama Ahmad, Alex Beutel, Alexandre Passos, and David G Robinson. Practices for
     Governing Agentic AI Systems. December 2023. URL https://cdn.openai.com/papers/
     practices-for-governing-agentic-ai-systems.pdf.

[42] Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Wenqi Zhang, Kan Ren, Siyu Yuan, Weiming Lu, Dong-
     sheng Li, and Yueting Zhuang. TaskBench: Benchmarking Large Language Models for Task Au-
     tomation, December 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.18760. arXiv:2311.18760
     [cs].

[43] Quan Shi, Michael Tang, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Can Language Models
     Solve Olympiad Programming?, April 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.10952.
     arXiv:2404.10952 [cs] version: 1.

[44] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
     Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning, October 2023.
     URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366. arXiv:2303.11366 [cs].

[45] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and
     Matthew Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Embodied Environments for Interactive
     Learning, March 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03768. arXiv:2010.03768 [cs].

[46] Simons Foundation. Mark Liberman - Reproducible Research and the Common Task
     Method (April 1, 2015), July 2019. URL https://www.simonsfoundation.org/event/
     reproducible-research-and-the-common-task-method/.


                                                15
[47] Paloma Sodhi, S. R. K. Branavan, Yoav Artzi, and Ryan McDonald. SteP: Stacked LLM Policies
     for Web Actions, April 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03720. arXiv:2310.03720
     [cs].
[48] Zhiqing Sun, Longhui Yu, Yikang Shen, Weiyang Liu, Yiming Yang, Sean Welleck, and Chuang
     Gan. Easy-to-Hard Generalization: Scalable Alignment Beyond Human Supervision, March
     2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.09472. arXiv:2403.09472 [cs].
[49] OpenDevin Team. OpenDevin: An Open Platform for AI Software Developers as Generalist
     Agents, June 2024. URL https://github.com/OpenDevin/OpenDevin. original-date:
     2024-03-13T03:33:31Z.
[50] Mudit Verma, Siddhant Bhambri, and Subbarao Kambhampati. On the Brittle Foundations of
     ReAct Prompting for Agentic Large Language Models, May 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/
     abs/2405.13966. arXiv:2405.13966 [cs].
[51] Pablo Villalobos and David Atkinson.     Trading Off Compute in Train-
     ing and Inference,    July 2023.        URL https://epochai.org/blog/
     trading-off-compute-in-training-and-inference.
[52] Kiri Wagstaff. Machine Learning that Matters, June 2012. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
     1206.4656. arXiv:1206.4656 [cs, stat].
[53] Cunxiang Wang, Ruoxi Ning, Boqi Pan, Tonghui Wu, Qipeng Guo, Cheng Deng, Guangsheng
     Bao, Qian Wang, and Yue Zhang. NovelQA: A Benchmark for Long-Range Novel Question
     Answering, March 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12766. arXiv:2403.12766
     [cs].
[54] Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. ScienceWorld:
     Is your Agent Smarter than a 5th Grader?, November 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
     2203.07540. arXiv:2203.07540 [cs].
[55] Xingyao Wang, Zihan Wang, Jiateng Liu, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji.
     MINT: Evaluating LLMs in Multi-turn Interaction with Tools and Language Feedback, March
     2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.10691. arXiv:2309.10691 [cs].
[56] Sean Welleck, Amanda Bertsch, Matthew Finlayson, Hailey Schoelkopf, Alex Xie, Graham
     Neubig, Ilia Kulikov, and Zaid Harchaoui. From Decoding to Meta-Generation: Inference-time
     Algorithms for Large Language Models, June 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.
     16838. arXiv:2406.16838 [cs].
[57] Lilian Weng. LLM Powered Autonomous Agents, June 2023. URL https://lilianweng.
     github.io/posts/2023-06-23-agent/. Section: posts.
[58] Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Renze Lou, Yuandong Tian, Yanghua Xiao,
     and Yu Su. TravelPlanner: A Benchmark for Real-World Planning with Language Agents,
     February 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01622. arXiv:2402.01622 [cs].
[59] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
     Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE-AGENT: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated
     Software Engineering. 2024. URL https://swe-agent.com/paper.pdf.
[60] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhut-
     dinov, and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A Dataset for Diverse, Explainable Multi-
     hop Question Answering, September 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.09600.
     arXiv:1809.09600 [cs].
[61] Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. WebShop: Towards Scalable
     Real-World Web Interaction with Grounded Language Agents, February 2023. URL http:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2207.01206. arXiv:2207.01206 [cs].
[62] Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. $\tau$-bench: A
     Benchmark for Tool-Agent-User Interaction in Real-World Domains, June 2024. URL
     http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.12045. arXiv:2406.12045 [cs].


                                              16
[63] Matei Zaharia, Omar Khattab, Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Heather Miller, Chris
     Potts, James Zou, Michael Carbin, Jonathan Frankle, Naveen Rao, and Ali Ghodsi. The Shift
     from Models to Compound AI Systems, February 2024. URL http://bair.berkeley.edu/
     blog/2024/02/18/compound-ai-systems/.
[64] Lily Zhong, Zilong Wang, and Jingbo Shang. LDB: A Large Language Model Debugger via
     Verifying Runtime Execution Step-by-step, April 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
     16906. arXiv:2402.16906 [cs].
[65] Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang.
     Language Agent Tree Search Unifies Reasoning Acting and Planning in Language Models,
     December 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.04406. arXiv:2310.04406 [cs].
[66] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi
     Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. WebArena:
     A Realistic Web Environment for Building Autonomous Agents, April 2024. URL http:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2307.13854. arXiv:2307.13854 [cs].




                                             17
Appendix

A    Additional details on Section 2: AI agent evaluations must be
     cost-controlled
We include four figures below: (i) Figure A1 shows the results of our HumanEval analysis along
with error bars for accuracy and cost; (ii) Figure A2 shows the results with the y-axis from 0 to 1 (in
other figures, the y-axis is clipped between 0.7 and 1 for clarity); (iii) Figure A4 the results of our
robustness checks with the June 2023 versions of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4; (iv) Figure A3 illustrates the
results of the time vs. accuracy Pareto curve.
In the figure reporting our results in the main text, we include the convex hull of points on the Pareto
frontier because, given any two agents on the frontier, we can always choose a strategy that picks
agent 1 with probability p and agent 2 with probability 1-p and to achieve any tradeoff represented by
points on the convex hull.




Figure A2: HumanEval results with a complete x- and y-axis. The figure shows accuracy vs. API
costs with a complete x- and y-axis. This plot showcases the wide range of costs associated with
different approaches, especially when considering LATS.




                                                  18
19




     Figure A1: Error bars for our HumanEval analysis. The figure shows accuracy vs. API cost for the HumanEval results zoomed in on the y-axis (0.7-1). The error
     bars represent 95% confidence intervals (left/lower; brown) and the minimum and maximum values (right/upper; gray) of accuracy and total cost across 5 runs. To
     calculate the 95% confidence intervals, we used the Student’s t distribution given that we only have five runs per agent.
Figure A3: Accuracy vs. inference time curves for HumanEval. This figure shows the accuracy
vs. inference time results on a linear x-axis scale, with the y-axis clipped to 0.7-1 for clarity. Time
measurements refer to the mean of the sum of inference times across all API calls made by the agent
across the five runs.


      Paper               Agent                        Accuracy             Total Cost (USD)
      Zhou et al. [65]    LATS (GPT-4)                 88.0 (82.3-91.5)     134.50 (123.98-147.13)
                          LATS (GPT-3.5)               80.4 (78.7-83.5)     9.49 (8.94-9.89)
      Zhong et al. [64]   LDB (GPT-4, GPT-3.5)         91.0 (89.0-92.1)     2.19 (2.14-2.25)
                          LDB (Reflexion, GPT-4)*      92.9 (91.5-95.1)     7.26 (6.19-9.63)
                          LDB (Reflexion, GPT-3.5)     88.9 (86.6-0.91.5)   4.19 (3.98-4.37)
                          LDB (GPT-4)*                 93.3 (92.1-94.5)     6.36 (5.11-7.08)
                          LDB (GPT-3.5)                80.2 (78.7-82.9)     0.63 (0.56-0.77)
                          GPT-4 (baseline)             89.6 (87.8-90.9)     1.93 (1.91-1.95)
                          GPT-3.5 (baseline)           73.9 (72.0-76.2)     0.05 (0.05-0.05)
      Shinn et al. [44]   Reflexion (GPT-4)            87.8 (86.0-90.9)     3.90 (3.76-4.13)
      Our baselines       Warming (GPT-4)              93.2 (92.1-93.9)     2.45 (2.36-2.54)
                          Retry (GPT-4)                92.0 (91.4-92.7)     2.51 (2.46-2.56)
                          Escalation                   85.0 (84.1-85.4)     0.27 (0.25-0.28)

Table A1: Accuracy and total cost of HumanEval agents. We run each agent five times and report
the mean accuracy and the mean total cost on the 164 HumanEval problems. The minimum and
maximum values are included in the parentheses. Rows marked by an asterisk are agent specifications
that the authors did not evaluate in the original paper. In particular, the original LDB paper does not
include tests with GPT-4 as the debugger.


A.1   Implementation details

We used gpt-3.5-turbo-0125 for GPT-3.5 implementations and gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09 for GPT -4
implementations. The underlying prices for GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 were 0.5$ (1.5$) and 10$ (30$) per
one million input (output) tokens, respectively, as of April 2024. We describe all implementations in


                                                  20
detail below. In addition to our analysis in the main text, we also conducted robustness checks with the
June 2023 versions of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 and found substantially similar results (see Appendix A.2.
When we conducted our measurements in April 2024, the prices for the gpt-4-0613 were 30$ (60$)
per one million input (output) tokens. Prices for gpt-3.5-turbo-0613 were identical to the January
2024 version – 0.5$ (1.5$) and 10$ (30$) per one million input (output) tokens, respectively.
HumanEval version. In evaluating our baseline agent architectures on HumanEval, we use the
modified benchmark version provided in the LDB paper [64]. This version includes internal test
cases for all 164 tasks (in the original benchmark, test cases were provided for only 161 of 164 tasks,
as detailed in Section 6).
GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. We implement the model baselines using the simple (zero shot; without agent
architecture) strategy provided with the LDB paper [64]. This includes a text prompt and the example
tests accompanying the HumanEval coding problem as inputs to the model.
LDB [64]. The LDB agent uses two language models: one for generating code and another for
debugging. In all plots and throughout this empirical analysis, we use the nomenclature “LDB
(Generator, Debugger)” to specify which models were used. If the same model served both functions,
we list it only once within parentheses. We kept all parameters as specified in the code accompanying
the original paper. In particular, this means that the maximum number of iterations is set to 10 and
the temperature to zero.5
LATS [65]. Based on correspondence with the authors, we set the maximum number of iterations to
8, the expansion factor to 3, and the temperature values for generating the function implementations
to 0.8. The temperature for generating self-reflections and the internal unit tests was set to 0.2. The
maximum number of internal test cases was set to 6 for runs with GPT-3.5 and 4 for runs using GPT-4.
The difference in the number of internal test cases for GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 was not presented in the
paper; we learned of this based on our correspondence with the authors.6
Reflexion [44]. We left all parameters unchanged from the ones provided in the original repository,
setting the maximum number of iterations to 2, expansion factor to 3, and temperature to zero for
generating function implementations. The temperature used for generating the internal tests and
self-reflections is 0.2.7
Retry. This baseline uses the simple strategy implemented in the code accompanying the LDB
agent for zero-shot evaluations of language models (i.e., there is no agent architecture). We used this
strategy to repeatedly prompt the same language model, keeping all parameters equal across retrials,
as long as the code outputted by the model failed at least one of the example tests. If at any point a
solution passes the tests given in the HumanEval problem description, we evaluate this as the final
solution of the agent for this problem. We repeated this procedure for up to 5 trials and stopped early
if the code passed all the given tests. We set the temperature to zero. This can still lead to success
after the first trial since LLMs aren’t deterministic even at temperature zero.8
Warming. For the warming baseline, we modify the retry baseline by gradually increasing the
temperature parameter across successive trials. Initially, the temperature was set at zero, mirroring the
retry baseline. For the second and third trials, we raised the temperature to 0.3, and for the final two
trials, we increased it further to 0.5. If at any point a solution passes the tests given in the HumanEval
problem description, we evaluate this as the final solution of the agent for this problem.
Escalation. We modify the simple strategy but switch the underlying model to a more expensive one
if a proposed solution fails at least one of the example tests. We progressively escalated unsolved
problems up a model chain of increasing cost (llama-3-8b-chat-hf, gpt-3.5-turbo-0125, llama-3-70b-
chat-hf, gpt-4-turbo-2024-04-09). All other parameters are kept constant across trials – in particular,
   5
     For the code version used in this study, which the original authors made available un-
der an Apache-2.0 license see:                 https://github.com/FloridSleeves/LLMDebugger/tree/
523e0ef9bfd5304bd91866c5d4582e5dfbb96abd
   6
     For the code version used in this study, which the original authors made available un-
der an MIT license see: https://github.com/lapisrocks/LanguageAgentTreeSearch/tree/
554886901183a9908183d2cb104c3088c493650a
   7
     For the code version used in this study, which the original authors made available under an MIT license see:
https://github.com/noahshinn/reflexion/tree/d15acda1c81d464d9a81648d7f29fb951e326c70
   8
     See: https://community.openai.com/t/run-same-query-many-times-different-results/
140588/2


                                                      21
temperature is set to zero. If at any point a solution passes the tests given in the HumanEval problem
description, we evaluate this as the final solution of the agent for this problem. This leads to slightly
lower accuracy compared to GPT-4, since some solutions from cheaper models might pass the
example tests but fail one of the evaluation tests.
Pareto frontiers. In our analysis, Pareto frontiers are employed to evaluate agent designs. We define
the Pareto frontier as the set of points (agents) that are non-dominated by any other agent in terms of
mean cost and accuracy. The frontier is constrained to be convex, meaning if two agents lie next to
each other on the frontier, any linear combination of these agents should also yield a point that lies on
the frontier curve. We provide a simple example implementation of how we compute Pareto frontiers
on simulated agent evaluation data.9

A.2     Robustness checks with June 2023 versions of GPT models

One concern with our analysis is that we use the latest versions of OpenAI’s April 2024 turbo models,
since later versions of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 might have more scope for contamination. To address this,
we conduct additional robustness checks with the June 2023 versions of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. We
find substantially similar results for this version: complex agents are no better than our simple agent
baselines while cost orders of magnitude more in some cases. Note that the June 2023 version of
GPT-4 is much more expensive than the April 2024 version, leading to the big difference in inference
cost. For the LATS agents, there are some significant outliers across tasks for both, LATS (GPT-4)
and LATS (GPT-3.5), with some tasks requiring more than 2 hours to complete for GPT-3.5. Overall,
there were more extreme outliers for LATS (GPT-3.5) than LATS (GPT-4). For the same reason,
we had to exclude one task (i.e., HumanEval/83) from the analysis for LATS (GPT-3.5), which did
not stop running even after 5 hours. We marked this task as incorrect and excluded the time and
cost from the results shown above. HumanEval/83 was one of the tasks excluded from the subset of
HumanEval that the authors evaluated the LATS agent on.




           (a) Accuracy vs. inference cost                      (b) Accuracy vs. inference time
Figure A4: Robustness checks with June 2023 versions of GPT models. This figure shows the
results of our robustness checks with linear x-axis and y-axis clipped to 0.7-1 for clarity. Time
measurements refer to the mean of the sum of inference times across all API calls made by the agent
across the five runs. Cost and accuracy measurements refer to the mean across five runs.



B       Additional details on Section 3: Jointly optimizing cost and accuracy can
        yield better agent designs
In this section, we include Figure A5, reporting the results of our analysis on HotPotQA along with
error bars for accuracy and cost, as well as Table A3, which reports our results and inference and
optimization cost for our five agent designs. In Fig. A7, we report the Pareto frontiers returned by our
joint optimization method for both models.
    9
   See:   https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1Yxb8pwY_QhJd50GgICOmFbe2rFWCFHC5?
usp=sharing


                                                   22
                   Paper               Agent                        Accuracy           Total Cost (USD)
                   Zhou et al. [65]    LATS (GPT-4)                 83.5               360.02
                                       LATS (GPT-3.5)               77.4               8.97
                   Zhong et al. [64]   LDB (GPT-4, GPT-3.5)         88.7 (87.2-89.6)   3.20 (3.14-3.26)
                                       LDB (Reflexion, GPT-4)*      90.5 (89.6-91.5)   18.01 (16.15-20.80)
                                       LDB (Reflexion, GPT-3.5)     86.7 (85.4-88.4)   8.71 (8.38-9.13)
                                       LDB (GPT-4)*                 91.2 (90.2-92.7)   9.31 (8.27-10.26)
                                       LDB (GPT-3.5)                82.1 (80.5-84.1)   0.68 (0.65-0.72)
                                       GPT-4 (baseline)             86.5 (84.8-87.2)   2.94 (2.92-2.95)
                                       GPT-3.5 (baseline)           75.2 (74.4-76.2)   0.04 (0.04-0.04)
                   Shinn et al. [44]   Reflexion (GPT-4)            80.2 (78.7-82.3)   8.29 (7.98-8.69)
                   Our baselines       Warming (GPT-4)              90.6 (89.0-91.5)   3.88 (3.82-3.92)
                                       Retry (GPT-4)                88.8 (87.2-89.6)   3.95 (3.78-4.09)
                                       Escalation                   87.6 (86.6-88.4)   0.42 (0.40-0.44)

Table A2: Accuracy and total cost of HumanEval robustness checks with June 2023 versions of
GPT models. As for the main analysis, we run each agent five times and report the mean accuracy
and the mean total cost on the 164 HumanEval problems. The minimum and maximum values are
included in the parentheses. Rows marked by an asterisk are agent specifications that the authors did
not evaluate in the original paper.

   Model               Agent                          Accuracy              Cost (USD, measured in May 2024)
                                                                                  Variable          Fixed
                       DSPy random search             0.495 (0.50-0.485)     0.376 (0.376-0.376)          2.696

     GPT-3.5
                       DSPy few-shot                  0.47 (0.46-0.48)       0.384 (0.384-0.385)          0.029
                       Joint optimization             0.509 (0.475-0.54)     0.174 (0.173-0.175)          2.714
                       Formatting instructions only   0.377 (0.36-0.39)     0.071 (0.070-0.0715)            -
                       Uncompiled                     0.436 (0.395-0.485)    0.095 (0.094-0.097)            -



     Llama-3-70B
                       DSPy random search             0.617 (0.60-0.63)       0.643 (0.64-0.644)          4.820
                       DSPy few-shot                  0.622 (0.615-0.63)     0.661 (0.660-0.662)          0.028
                       Joint optimization             0.601 (0.59-0.62)      0.374 (0.372-0.378)          3.844
                       Formatting instructions only   0.527 (0.52-0.535)     0.111 (0.110-0.112)            -
                       Uncompiled                     0.448 (0.43-0.46)      0.194 (0.194-0.195)            -

Table A3: Accuracy and two types of cost of agent designs evaluated on HotPotQA. We evaluate
each agent five times on the test set and report the mean accuracy. Variable cost refers to the cost per
100 inferences on HotPotQA. Fixed costs are the total costs incurred during the optimization of the
agent design. The minimum and maximum accuracy are included in the parentheses.




                               (a) GPT-3.5                                        (b) Llama-3-70B
Figure A7: Pareto frontiers returned by joint optimization. This figure shows the Pareto frontier
of programs returned by our joint optimization method with linear x-axes and y-axes clipped to
0.14-0.32 for clarity. Note that the x-axes do not follow the same scale. Accuracies are calculated on
the development set. Cost measurements refer to API prices as of May 2024.


                                                             23
Figure A5: Error bars for our HotPotQA analysis. The figure shows retrieval accuracy vs. API
cost for the HotPotQA results. The error bars represent 95% confidence intervals (left/lower; brown)
and the minimum and maximum values (right/upper; gray) of accuracy and total cost across 5 runs.
To calculate the 95% confidence intervals, we used the Student’s t distribution given that we only
have five runs per agent. Note that the error bars account for the in-sample variance on the test set
and do not account for the variability induced during optimization and resampling.


B.1     Implementation details

For GPT-3.5 implementations, we used gpt-3.5-turbo-0125 via the Azure OpenAI endpoint, and
for Llama-3-70B implementations, we used meta-llama/Llama-3-70b-chat-hf via the Together.ai
endpoint. The underlying prices for GPT-3.5 and Llama-3-70B were 0.5$ (1.5$) and 0.9$ (0.9$) per
one million input (output) tokens, respectively, as of May 2024. Note that these costs vary over time,
which would affect the outcomes of the cost-controlled assessments as emphasized in Appendix A. In
addition to the details outlined in Section 2, we provide further details on all implementations below.
Multi-Hop Question-Answering. For our analysis of HotPotQA, we rely on multi-hop question
answering as our agent design to produce answers given the questions given in the benchmark. We use
the default implementation provided by the DSPy framework10 that itself follows a simplified version
of the Baleen system [23]. This requires a language model to reason across multiple documents and
retrieve context leveraging a text corpus. We use the ColBERTv2 retriever model, which provides an
endpoint to retrieve context from a 2017 Wikipedia dump containing each article’s first paragraph.11
The implementation is structured around three core functions: query generation, information retrieval,
and answer generation. Initially, a search query is dynamically constructed for each iteration up to a
preset maximum number of hops, given the question and already retrieved context. This query then
retrieves the top-k most relevant paragraphs from Wikipedia. These documents are then deduplicated
and added as context in subsequent steps. Once the iterative process of query generation and
information retrieval is complete, a language model reasons on the retrieved information given the
question and generates the final answer.
For our experiments with this design of multi-hop question-answering, we set the number of passages
to retrieve and the number of hops to two. The maximum number of demonstrations is set to 8
(i.e., this includes the corresponding parameters for bootstrapped and labeled few-shot examples
in DSPy). As HotPotQA contains ground-truth documents that the agent should retrieve for each
task, we evaluate performance by determining whether all of the specified documents were retrieved.
  10
       See: https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/docs/tutorials/simplified-baleen.
  11
       See: https://hotpotqa.github.io/wiki-readme.html


                                                  24
Figure A6: With increased use, the total cost of running an agent is dominated by the variable cost.
Precisely, the point of intersection is reached after 1332 (1275) inferences for Llama-3-70B (GPT-3.5).
We use the average cost of optimizing the models across our 5 runs as the fixed cost and the average
cost of running inference using the agent across the 200 tasks in the evaluation set as the variable cost
per task. We refer to Table A3 for an overview of exact cost and accuracy measurements alongside
minimum and maximum values across runs.


For optimization and evaluation, we randomly select 100 and 200 samples from HotPotQA for
optimization and evaluation of the results, respectively. To ensure reproducibility, we set a fixed seed.
Uncompiled. This baseline uses the outlined multi-hop question-answering system in an uncompiled
state. That is, the program is not optimized and the agent’s prompt includes neither the few-shot
examples nor instructions on how to format the generated output. Hence, each prompt only includes
the instructions for the task and the main content including the retrieved context and the reasoning
steps generated by the language model. No formatting instructions are provided.
Formatting instructions only. This baseline is identical to the uncompiled agent design but includes
instructions on how to format the output of each query part of the agent program. We use the default
formatting instruction part of DSPy.
DSPy default optimization. We use the BootstrapFewShot12 (Few-Shot) and BootstrapFewShotWith-
RandomSearch 13 (Random Search) optimizer from the DSPy framework to optimize our multi-hop
question-answering agent. BootstrapFewShot iterates over training set samples to identify examples
where the agent makes correct predictions based on the provided compilation metric. As a metric, we
ensure that the predicted answer matches the ground-truth and is included in the retrieved context.
Further, none of the generated queries can exceed 100 characters and retrieval queries must be
sufficiently unique. For each successful prediction, the optimizer captures the trace of the prediction
process, including inputs, predictor calls, and outputs. This metric also comes from the same DSPy
tutorial.14 The resulting traces are used to create demonstrations for each step, which are then
incorporated into the compiled agent. This process continues until all training examples have been
considered or the maximum number of successful examples for inclusion has been reached. If the
maximum number of successful examples has not been reached after iterating over the entire training
set, the optimizer randomly selects the missing number of examples from the data to include as
demonstrations in the prompt. BootstrapFewShotWithRandomSearch repeats this process several
times and conducts a random search over the generated demonstrations before selecting the best
program on the development set. We set the number of candidate programs to 16.
Joint optimization. Our joint optimization allows us to trade off fixed and variable costs: we
can spend money upfront searching the space of prompts and few-shot examples that minimize
the variable cost while maintaining accuracy. It builds on the BootstrapFewShot implementation
  12
     See: https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/docs/deep-dive/teleprompter/bootstrap-fewshot
  13
     See: https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/docs/building-blocks/optimizers
  14
     See: https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/docs/tutorials/simplified-baleen


                                                   25
from DSPy. However, instead of stopping once a specified number of maximum demonstrations
is reached, our process keeps iterating over all samples in the training set to build a collection of
few-shot examples that we can select from during optimization. Joint optimization of accuracy and
the number of tokens of the few-shot examples and formatting instructions included in the prompt via
parameter search is implemented with the Optuna Python library [2]. Optuna supports multi-objective
optimization to jointly maximize accuracy and minimize the cost of our agent design 15 . In our
objective function required by Optuna, we sample values to search over the following parameters
to find Pareto-optimal agent designs: (a) the temperature for each module within the agent, (b) the
number of few-shot examples, (c) the selection of specific examples to include, and (d) whether to
add formatting instructions. Candidate temperature values for each module in the agent pipeline
are sampled from 0.0, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.6. We set the number of trials Optuna conducts to 16. The
maximum number of few-shot examples per prompt is set to 8.
We evaluated the Pareto-efficient programs that Optuna returns on the dev set (50 samples). In figure
2 and A5, we report the mean accuracy and cost of the program with the highest accuracy on the
development set.
The goal is to balance the fixed cost of optimization with the variable cost of running the agent,
ensuring both cost-effective and accurate performance. The results from Optuna can themselves be
seen as a Pareto curve of agent designs.

C        Survey on agent benchmarks
We provide a detailed survey of 17 recent agent benchmarks, along with their levels of generality
and respective holdout sets in Table A4. As shown in Table 1, the holdout set must correspond to
the level of benchmark generality to prevent gaming. However, many of the benchmarks in the
survey do not have holdout sets at the appropriate generality level and benchmark designers do not
express intentions to include the appropriate holdout set for the benchmark in the future. To select
agent benchmarks, we relied on the benchmarks included in AgentBench [30], AgentBoard [31],
OpenDevin [49], and the ICLR 2024 workshop on LLM agents, in addition to benchmarks we had
previously come across.
Note that WebArena uses the term “domain” to refer to different types of websites in their benchmark
(e-commerce, social media etc.), which is different from how we use the term (e.g., all tasks in
WebArena fall under the web interaction domain per our usage of the term).

D        Additional details on Section 4: Details about NovelQA implementation
We run evaluations on the multiple-choice subset of the NovelQA benchmark. In addition to re-
evaluating the results of GPT-4 (the current state-of-the-art model on NovelQA multiple choice),
we include an agent that comprises GPT-4 with retrieval-augmented generation. Instead of feeding
in the entire novel in the context window of the model, we embed each novel using OpenAI’s
text-embedding-3-large model. For each multiple-choice question in the benchmark, we retrieve
10 chunks of 1000 characters each, which we use as inputs to the model. We used the prompt from
the original NovelQA paper, slightly modified to add context for the RAG snippets (Listing 1).
We find that our retrieval agent performs substantially similarly to the GPT-4 model. In particular,
GPT-4 with retrieval has an accuracy of 67.89 (total cost: $52.8 USD), whereas when we use the
entire content of the novel as input tokens, the accuracy is 67.81 (total cost: $99.8 USD). Wang et al.
[53] report an accuracy of 71% for GPT-4 in the paper introducing NovelQA. The difference might
be due to the stochasticity of language models. Due to the high cost of running the evaluation, we
only ran our evaluations once. Irrespective of the small differences in the absolute value of accuracy,
it is clear from these results that the difference in accuracy between RAG-based approaches and
long-context approaches is small. For comparing cost fairly in a single question-answer setting, in
theory, we could query the language model around 2,300 times (the total number of questions) instead
of 88 times (the total number of novels; as they implemented it) and incur a cost of around $2,590 for
evaluating GPT-4. However, that’s not how the authors evaluate models on NovelQA (and it’s also
    15
   See:        https://optuna.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/20_recipes/002_multi_
objective.html


                                                  26
                                                                                                                                                             leve
                                                                                                                                                                 l?
                                                                                                                                                          ality
                                                                                                                                                     ate g
                                                                                                                                                          ener
                                                                                                                                                                                            oldo
                                                       n                                                                                         opri                                           ut
                                                    ripti
                                                          o                                 lity                                               appr                                      eal h
                                                   desc
                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                        nera                       ld o
                                                                                                                        u                ut a                                          o f id
                                                                                                                                             t the
                                                                                                         t
                                               ark                                    f ge             ut se     is h e
                                              chm                                                                                                                                 mpl
                                                                                  Lev              Hol                                Hol                                             e
                                                                                     el o                      Wha
                                             Ben                                                      do           t                      do                                     Exa
Benchmark           Domain
MLAgentBench[19]    Programming              Measures the accuracy of agents      Task-specific                N/A                    Lacks a test set and doesn’t indicate      Research tasks in languages other
                                             specifically on machine learning                                                         plans to make one.                         than Python.
                                             experimentation.
SWE-Bench[59]       Programming              Measures the accuracy of agents      Task-specific    ◦           In distribution sam-   The held-out set currently contains        Repositories in languages other
                                             specifically on solving software                                  ples                   repositories not seen during training      than Python.
                                             engineering problems. Authors                                                            but are otherwise of a similar distri-
                                             intend to include repositories in                                                        bution as training. Authors mention
                                             the benchmark beyond the 12                                                              plans to collect repositories in differ-
                                             initially sampled.                                                                       ent programming languages, though
                                                                                                                                      not exclusively for the held-out set.
WebArena[66]        Web task automation      Measures the accuracy of agents      Domain-general               N/A                    Lacks a holdout set and doesn’t in-        New websites & tasks not seen dur-
                                             on many different web tasks.                                                             dicate plans to make one.                  ing training, such as making plane
                                                                                                                                                                                 or train travel bookings.
WebShop[61]         E-commerce               Measures the accuracy of agents      Task-specific    ◦           Out of distribution    Authors evaluate sim-to-real trans-        N/A
                                             specifically on their ability to                                  samples                fer of the agent, where they test the
                                             purchase items from the web.                                                             agent’s performance on real web-
                                                                                                                                      sites such as amazon.com.
Mind2Web[11]        Web task automation      Measures the accuracy of agents      Domain-general   ◦           Tasks                  Authors hold out two top-level do-         N/A
                                             on many different web tasks.                                                             mains, Information and Service.
PPNL[1]             Path planning            Measures the accuracy of agents      Task-specific    ◦           Out of distribution    Authors test LLM performance on            N/A
                                             specifically on their ability to                                  samples                out of distribution tasks with differ-
                                             plan paths between points.                                                               ent grid sizes and obstacle counts.
TravelPlanner[58]   Travel planning          Measures the accuracy of agents      Task-specific    ◦           In distribution sam-   The held-out set includes tasks not        Destination queries with unseen
                                             specifically on their ability to                                  ples                   seen during training, but they are not     cities, budgets, and hard con-
                                             create travel plans.                                                                     of a different distribution than the       straints.
                                                                                                                                      training tasks.
agbenchmark[36]     General purpose          Measures the accuracy of agents      Fully general                N/A                    Lacks a held-out set and doesn’t in-       Domains outside of the ones cur-
                                             on various domains. These in-                                                            dicate plans to make one.                  rently in the benchmark to prevent
                                             clude interface, code generation,                                                                                                   gaming. These may include web
                                             code modification, retrieval, and                                                                                                   navigation, visual and spatial rea-
                                             safety.                                                                                                                             soning, long term planning, etc.
LLF-Bench[8]        Interactive learning     Measures the accuracy of agents      Domain-general               N/A                    Lacks a held-out set and doesn’t in-       Decision-making problems be-
                                             on a set of learning-based tasks.                                                        dicate plans to make one. How-             yond the 8 provided, or instruction
                                                                                                                                      ever, authors recognize prompt over-       types/feedback types unseen dur-
                                                                                                                                      fitting is an issue and design the         ing training.
                                                                                                                                      LLF-Bench environments to para-
                                                                                                                                      phrase instructions.
TaskBench[42]       Task automation          Measures the accuracy of agents      Domain-general               N/A                    Lacks a held-out set and doesn’t in-       Tasks with different tool sources to
                                             on a set of tasks within the task                                                        dicate plans to make one.                  build problems from unseen tool
                                             automation domain.                                                                                                                  graphs.
AlfWorld[45]        Household tasks          Measures the accuracy of agents      Domain-general   ◦           Out of distribution    The held-out set includes distinct         Rather than training on all six Al-
                                             on many different tasks within                                    samples                task instances and rooms that were         fred task-types, hold out some for
                                             the household environment.                                                               unseen during training. However,           test evaluations.
                                                                                                                                      the held-out task instances fall under
                                                                                                                                      the same six ALFRED task types as
                                                                                                                                      the training task instances.
ScienceWorld[54]    Science                  Measures the accuracy of agents      Task-specific    ◦           Out of distribution    The held-out set includes variations       N/A
                                             specifically on elementary-level                                  samples                such that critical objects, starting lo-
                                             scientific reasoning in a text en-                                                       cations, and the contents of the envi-
                                             vironment.                                                                               ronment are unseen during training.
BabyAI[9]           Task automation          Measures the accuracy of agents      Domain-general   ◦           In distribution sam-   The held out set includes 512              New BabyAI levels, or symbolic
                                             on a general set of navigation-                                   ples                   episodes, but it’s unclear whether         observations of different sizes than
                                             related tasks in the given envi-                                                         these episodes are of a different          the training set.
                                             ronment.                                                                                 distribution or task type from the
                                                                                                                                      episodes found in training.
Jericho[15]         Games                    The benchmark samples from           Distribution-    ◦           In-distribution sam-   The authors intend to use the set of       N/A
                                             and evaluates agents on IF           specific                     ples                   Jericho unsupported IF games as a
                                             games that cover a variety of                                                            training set, and evaluate the agent
                                             genres.                                                                                  on the Jericho supported IF games.
GAIA[33]            General-purpose          Measures the accuracy of agents      Fully general    ◦           In-distribution sam-   The held-out set includes 300 ques-        Additional question types requir-
                                             on a general set of questions                                     ples                   tions but it’s unclear whether they        ing, e.g., usage of new tools.
                                             requiring various fundamental                                                            come from a different distribution
                                             abilities and tool use.                                                                  than the training set.
MINT[55]            Task automation          Measures the tool-augmented          Domain-general               N/A                    Lacks a held-out set but authors           Additional tools that must be used
                                             task-solving capability of agents                                                        mention plans to update the bench-         to solve tasks of unseen types.
                                             on a general set of tasks.                                                               mark with new tasks and tools.
τ -bench[62]        Tool-agent-user inter-   Measures agents’ capacity to         Domain-general               N/A                    Lacks a held-out set but authors           Additional unseen domains agents
                    action                   gather and communicate all nec-                                                          mention plans to update benchmark          must solve tasks in while interact-
                                             essary data to and from users                                                            with new domains and tasks.                ing with the user and using new
                                             through repeated interactions                                                                                                       tools.
                                             and completing tasks.
                    Table A4: A survey of recent agent benchmarks shows that 7/17 benchmarks do not include holdout
                    sets for evaluating agents’ performance and do not indicate plans to do so. Of those with holdout sets,
                    only 5/10 hold out sets are at the appropriate generality level. We made our best guess for the level of
                    generality based on the description of the benchmark’s purpose in its paper or repository.



                                                                                                   27
      You are a literature professor . I will provide you with snippets from a novel along
           with a question and corresponding choices pertaining to it . Please thoroughly
           analyze the content to accurately respond to the question .

      Relevant snippets from the novel :

      < context >

      Question :

      < question >

      Only respond with the index of the correct answer ( e . g . , choose between A , B , C , and
           D ) . Your output should not contain anything else .

Listing 1: Prompt used for RAG implementation on NovelQA. This is the prompt from the original
NovelQA paper. We only make the slight modification of adding in the retrieved context.


                                                                   RAG      Long-Context
              Total Cost                                         $52.80             $99.80
              Accuracy                                            67.89              67.81
              RAG Specific:
              Cost of embedding 88 novels                        $2.512                  -
              Cost of embedding one novel                       $0.0285                  -
              Cost per Question                                 $0.0222                  -
              Cost per QA for a new novel                        $0.051                  -
              Long-Context Specific:
              Mean prompt tokens per novel                                       690.807
              Total tokens of questions and options                              110,094
              Total tokens (prompt + questions + options)                     170885.016
              Total long-context question cost                                    $1.709
              Long-context novel cost                                             $98.09
              Long-context cost per novel (single question)                       $1.115
              Comparison:
              Cost Ratio (Long-Context/RAG)                               ≈ 21.86
Table A5: Simple cost comparison of RAG and Long-Context approaches on NovelQA. We used
the tiktoken tokenizer to measure the exact token counts for (a) the questions, (b) the four answer
options, and (c) the prompt template from the original paper [53]. Costs are calculated using May
2024 prices. Due to the high cost of running the evaluation, we only ran our evaluations once.



not how they expect model developers to do it). Again, this choice is justifiable for model evaluation,
since the purpose of long-context model evaluation is equally well served by having a long list of
questions.

E Additional details on Section 6: Agent evaluations lack standardization and
  reproducibility
We provide further details on our findings on the limited reproducibility and lack of standardization
in current agent evaluations. Table A6 details the identified issues for each agent on HumanEval and
WebArena we reproduced for this study. Table A7 reports the corresponding numeric performance
measurements as well as minimum and maximum values across runs for HumanEval.

E.1     HumanEval implementation details

LDB [64]. The LDB paper claims to use GPT-3.5 for code generation using Reflexion: “For Reflexion,
we select the version based on GPT-3.5 and utilize the corresponding generated programs published


                                                  28
 Benchmark Paper                      Evaluation issues affecting this paper
 WebArena      Zhou et al. [66]       • Rate limits on Reddit website impacted task
                                        completions. This affected 2/129 tasks of the Reddit
                                        subset.
                                      • Autologin functionality for Reddit site was not
                                        implemented correctly (i.e., open todo comment in
                                        code) (see Appendix E.1). Caused the agent to
                                        silently fail on affected tasks.

               Sodhi et al. [47]      • Evaluated on subset of benchmark. Remove 8
                                        problems from WebArena for unclear reasons.
                                      • Agent is evaluated incorrectly. Original log files
                                        provided by authors mark failed tasks as successfully
                                        solved. See Listing 2 for an example.
                                      • Rate limits on Reddit website impacted task
                                        completions. This affected 30/129 tasks of the Reddit
                                        subset. See Listing 2 for an example.

 HumanEval Zhou et al. [65]           • Evaluate on subset of benchmark. Authors remove
                                        four problems in their evaluations-three because
                                        HumanEval does not provide example tests and one
                                        for unclear reasons.
                                      • Agent is evaluated incorrectly. Generated solutions
                                        are only evaluated on true test cases for a subset of
                                        the tasks in HumanEval. Leads to incorrect solutions
                                        passing as correct.

               Zhong et al. [64]      • Underreport baseline. The paper claimed an accuracy
                                        of 75.0%, while our evaluation showed a mean
                                        accuracy of 89.6% across five runs.
                                      • Evaluate on modified version of benchmark. Add
                                        example tests for 3/164 problems that are missing in
                                        the original benchmark.
                                      • Claim to use GPT-3.5 for code generation using
                                        Reflexion. However, the generated program they used
                                        from the Reflexion repository relies on GPT-4 for
                                        code generation, not GPT-3.5.

               Shinn et al. [44]      • Evaluate on subset of benchmark. Remove three prob-
                                        lems missing example tests in HumanEval. Do not
                                        report this.

Table A6: Examples of shortcomings in current agent evaluations stemming from inadequate
benchmark standardization. This table provides additional details on the shortcomings of agent
evaluations affecting current state-of-the-art agents from five papers on the leaderboards of Hu-
manEval and WebArena. It lists all issues arising from inadequate benchmark standardization that
impact the evaluations for each agent.


in the official Github repository.” However, the generated program they used from the Reflexion
repository relies on GPT-4 for code generation, not GPT-3.5. The authors acknowledge this and plan
to update the paper to address it. In addition, LDB, such as LATS and Reflexion, all use different
subset of HumanEval problems. Three (out of 164) coding problems in the original version of


                                               29
              Paper               Agent                                 Accuracy
                                                             Reported       Reproduced
              Zhou et al. [65]    LATS (GPT-4)                 94.4      88.0 (0.823-0.915)
                                  LATS (GPT-3.5)               83.8      80.4 (0.787-0.835)
              Zhong et al. [64]   LDB (GPT-4, GPT-3.5)         89.6      91.0 (0.89-0.921)
                                  LDB (Reflexion, GPT-3.5)     95.1      88.9 (0.866-0.915)
                                  LDB (GPT-3.5)                82.9      80.2 (0.787-0.829)
                                  GPT-4                        75.0      89.6 (0.878-0.909)
              Shinn et al. [44]   Reflexion (GPT-4)            91.0       87.8 (0.86-0.909)

Table A7: Reported vs. reproduced accuracy of agents on HumanEval. This table contains the
reported and reproduced accuracies of the HumanEval agents part of our analysis. We report the
accuracy of each agent evaluated on all 164 tasks of HumanEval. Note that insufficient standardization
of the benchmark, rather than mistakes made by the agent developers, is a major contributing factor
to many of the observed discrepancies. We run each agent five times and report the mean accuracy.
The minimum and maximum accuracy are included in the parentheses.


HumanEval lack example tests. Since LDB requires example tests to debug or rerun their solutions,
the authors added example tests for the three problems that are missing in the original benchmark.
LATS [65]. The LATS agent requires example tests as well. However, for the three HumanEval
problems that do not contain example tests, the authors remove these problems, plus another problem,
for unreported reasons. The authors do not mention this in the original paper. In correspondence
with the authors of LATS, they clarified: “Originally, there was an execution error when evaluating
some test cases for [one of the HumanEval test cases], so we opted to remove it from our setting.”
They acknowledge that they didn’t report this in the paper and will update the manuscript accordingly.
In addition, their agent was evaluated on only a subset of the test cases provided in the HumanEval
benchmark. This exaggerated their accuracy numbers, since the code for a particular HumanEval
problem might be incorrect, but if it passes only a portion of the test cases for that problem, it could
still be marked as correct. In our analysis, this was responsible for a 3% difference in accuracy (mean
across five runs), which explains a substantial part of the difference between the accuracy we found
and the one reported in the paper.
Reflexion [44]. The authors remove the three problems of HumanEval that lack example tests and
evaluate on only 161 out of the 164 tasks of the benchmark.

F        Statement on compute resources used
For all our experiments using OpenAI models, we utilized the endpoints provided by OpenAI16 ,
either directly or through the Azure OpenAI Service17 . For the analysis on HotPotQA using Llama-3
models, we relied on the endpoints provided by Together.ai.18 As our work primarily relied on
external APIs, we did not use any GPUs for inference and our experiments did not require training of
LLMs.

G        Limitations
While our research advances the understanding of AI agent evaluations significantly, we must
acknowledge several limitations that future work could address. First, our proposed methods for
cost-controlled evaluations and the joint optimization of cost and accuracy rely on current cost models
and technological constraints. These models are subject to change as technology evolves and new
pricing models are introduced, altering our results. We fully acknowledge this challenge to cost
evaluation as proposed in Section 2. To address this downside, we provide a dynamic web application
accompanying the results of this paper, which allows users to modify the underlying cost of input and
    16
       See: https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/chat
    17
       See: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/ai-services/openai-service
    18
       See: https://api.together.xyz/models


                                                      30
    {
          " objective " : " Find a subreddit focused on topics related to city Pittsburgh , and
                 post my question , \" places for new drivers to learn driving \" there " ,
          " url " : " http :// ec2 -3 -131 -244 -37. us - east -2. compute . amazonaws . com :9999/ submit /
                 pittsburgh " ,
          " observation " : " Tab 0 ( current ) : Create submission \ n \ n [8431] RootWebArea ’ Create
                 submission ’ focused : True \ n \ t [8474] H e a d e r A s N o n L a n d m a r k ’ ’\ n \ t \ t [8475] link ’
                 Home ’\ n \ t \ t \ t [8510] StaticText [...] " ,
          " action " : " stop [ N / A ] " ,
          " reason " : " The user ’s objective is to post a question in a subreddit focused on
                 topics related to the city of Pittsburgh . The observation indicates that the
                 user is on the \" Create submission \" page for the Pittsburgh subreddit and
                 has already filled in the title and body of the post . However , an error
                 message is displayed stating , \" You cannot post more . Wait a while before
                 trying again .\" This means the action to post the question cannot be
                 completed at this moment due to a restriction or limit set by the website . " ,
          " done " : true ,
          " reward " : 1.0 ,
          " success " : 1.0 ,
          " num_actions " : 12
    }

Listing 2: Example snippet from the original log files provided by the authors of the STeP agent. The
snippet shows how the rate limit on the Reddit site affects evaluation. Given the observation from
the web environment, the agent correctly concludes that it’s currently not possible to make a posting
given the rate limit imposed on the user. Despite the environment imposing this limit, the task is
still evaluated as successfully solved. This is an example of incorrectly evaluated agents leading to
inflated results.




output tokens for each model. This allows us to recalculate the underlying cost of each agent part of
our analysis using current prices. We argue that this should be part of all downstream evaluations of
agents.
Second, while our study spans a range of benchmarks and agent models, it does not exhaustively cover
all possible task environments and variations of AI agents. Still, we demonstrate that our findings
on the limited construct validity of current AI agent benchmarks and the lack of reproducibility and
standardized evaluations hold across tasks and domains, providing empirical findings for multiple
benchmarks and agent designs. We further describe why agent evaluations should be cost-controlled
in tasks beyond programming. Our empirical findings that joint optimization of cost and accuracy
can lead to more cost-efficient agent designs on a question-answering benchmark emphasize this
argument.
Finally, other types of costs, including environmental impact, human labor for data annotation, and
maintenance costs of AI systems, have not been extensively analyzed. These factors are becoming
increasingly relevant as AI systems scale up and are deployed more widely, necessitating a more
comprehensive approach to evaluating the full economic and environmental impact of AI.



H       Societal impact

Our work on enhancing AI agent evaluations carries significant societal implications. By improving
the efficiency and reliability of these systems, we can potentially reduce the economic and envi-
ronmental costs associated with their deployment, fostering broader accessibility and encouraging
cost-sensitivity among developers. However, the increasing sophistication of AI agents also raises
safety risks. While our work doesn’t directly address these risks, we firmly believe that existing
frameworks for governing agentic AI [41], are crucial for mitigating potential harms. Developers and
deployers must prioritize the implementation of these frameworks to ensure responsible development
and deployment. Furthermore, our work on cost measurement can help improve safety evaluation.
By providing tools to assess the affordability of potentially dangerous capabilities, our research can
help identify and anticipate safety concerns before they become widespread. This is why AI safety
benchmark developers should include cost measurements.


                                                             31
I        Reproducibility statement
We release code to reproduce all experimental results of this paper in a GitHub repository under a
MIT license.19 This includes scripts to reproduce our analyses of HumanEval, HotPotQA, NovelQA,
and WebArena, as well as implementations of our proposed baselines and the DSPy implementation
for our joint optimizer. As an example of an interface that lets downstream users explore the impact
of varying API costs, we also provide an interactive web application.20 This allows users to input
current pricing for different language models and visualize the adjusted cost-accuracy tradeoffs on
HumanEval for the agents we evaluated (Section 2). Finally, we plan to release our joint optimizer to
the official DSPy repository and the research community. To show how we compute Pareto frontiers,
we provide a simple example implementation on simulated agent evaluation data.21

Checklist
          1. For all authors...
              (a) Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s
                  contributions and scope? [Yes] See Section 1 with clear mapping from each claim to
                  its respective section.
              (b) Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes] See Appendix G.
              (c) Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [Yes] See
                  Appendix G and Appendix H.
              (d) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
                  them? [Yes]
          2. If you are including theoretical results...
              (a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [N/A] We are not
                  including theoretical results.
              (b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [N/A] We are not including
                  theoretical results.
          3. If you ran experiments (e.g. for benchmarks)...
              (a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experi-
                  mental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes] We release code
                  to reproduce all experimental results of this paper. We do so by releasing an openly
                  available GitHub repository to which we provide the URL in Appendix I.
              (b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
                  were chosen)? [Yes] See Appendix A.1, Appendix B.1, Appendix E.1, and Appendix D
              (c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experi-
                  ments multiple times)? [Yes] We included error bars for all our main empirical findings.
                  See Table A1, Fig. A1, Table A3, Fig. A5. The only empirical results we mention in
                  our paper for which we could not report error bars is our case study of the NovelQA
                  benchmark (Section 4.1). We could not run this evaluation more than once due to the
                  high cost of running it.
              (d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type
                  of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes] See Appendix F.
          4. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
              (a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? [Yes]
              (b) Did you mention the license of the assets? [Yes] See footnotes in Appendix A.1 and
                  Appendix E.1.
              (c) Did you include any new assets either in the supplemental material or as a URL? [Yes]
                  See footnote in Section 4 for URL to our webapp and Appendix I.
    19
     See: https://github.com/benediktstroebl/agent-evals
    20
     See: https://benediktstroebl.github.io/agent-eval-webapp/
  21
     See:    https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1Yxb8pwY_QhJd50GgICOmFbe2rFWCFHC5?
usp=sharing


                                                       32
    (d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you’re
        using/curating? [N/A] We are only using publicly available benchmark data that are
        intended to the used by researchers.
    (e) Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curating contains personally identifiable
        information or offensive content? [N/A] We do not use any data that contains personally
        identifiable information.
5. If you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects...
    (a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if
        applicable? [N/A] We did not use crowdsourcing or conducted research with human
        subjects.
    (b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with links to Institutional Review Board
        (IRB) approvals, if applicable? [N/A] We did not use crowdsourcing or conducted
        research with human subjects.
    (c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount
        spent on participant compensation? [N/A] We did not use crowdsourcing or conducted
        research with human subjects.




                                            33
