Journal of Machine Learning Research 22 (2021) 1-20                 Submitted 3/20; Revised 1/21; Published 5/21




   Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research
     (A Report from the NeurIPS 2019 Reproducibility Program )

Joelle Pineau                                                                        jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca
School of Computer Science, McGill University (Mila)
Facebook AI Research
CIFAR
Philippe Vincent-Lamarre                              philippe.vincent-lamarre@umontreal.ca
Ecole de bibliothèconomie et des sciences de l’information,
Université de Montréal
Koustuv Sinha                                                            koustuv.sinha@mail.mcgill.ca
School of Computer Science, McGill University (Mila)
Facebook AI Research
Vincent Larivière                                                   vincent.lariviere@umontreal.ca
Ecole de bibliothéconomie et des sciences de l’information,
Université de Montréal
Alina Beygelzimer                                                                  beygel@yahoo-inc.com
Yahoo! Research
Florence d’Alché-Buc                                              florence.dalche@telecom-paris.fr
Télécom Paris,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Emily Fox                                                                      ebfox@cs.washington.edu
University of Washington
Apple
Hugo Larochelle                                                           hugolarochelle@google.com
Google Research, Brain Team
CIFAR


Editor: Russ Greiner


                                                  Abstract
     One of the challenges in machine learning research is to ensure that presented and published
     results are sound and reliable. Reproducibility, that is obtaining similar results as presented
     in a paper or talk, using the same code and data (when available), is a necessary step to
     verify the reliability of research findings. Reproducibility is also an important step to
     promote open and accessible research, thereby allowing the scientific community to quickly
     integrate new findings and convert ideas to practice. Reproducibility also promotes the use
     of robust experimental workflows, which potentially reduce unintentional errors. In 2019,
     the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) conference, the premier international
     conference for research in machine learning, introduced a reproducibility program, designed
     to improve the standards across the community for how we conduct, communicate, and
     evaluate machine learning research. The program contained three components: a code
     submission policy, a community-wide reproducibility challenge, and the inclusion of the

c 2021 Joelle Pineau, Philippe Vincent-Lamarre, Koustuv Sinha, Vincent Larivière, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence
d’Alché-Buc, Emily Fox, Hugo Larochelle. Corresponding author: Joelle Pineau (jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca).
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Attribution requirements are provided
at http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-303.html.
Pineau, Vincent-Lamarre, Sinha, Larivière, Beygelzimer, d’Alché-Buc, Fox, Larochelle




    Machine Learning Reproducibility checklist as part of the paper submission process. In
    this paper, we describe each of these components, how it was deployed, as well as what we
    were able to learn from this initiative.
    Keywords: Reproducibility, NeurIPS 2019


1. Introduction
At the very foundation of scientific inquiry is the process of specifying a hypothesis, running
an experiment, analyzing the results, and drawing conclusions. Time and again, over the
last several centuries, scientists have used this process to build our collective understanding
of the natural world and the laws that govern it. However, for the findings to be valid and
reliable, it is important that the experimental process be repeatable, and yield consistent
results and conclusions. This is of course well-known, and to a large extent, the very
foundation of the scientific process. Yet a 2016 survey in the journal Nature revealed that
more than 70% of researchers failed in their attempt to reproduce another researcher’s
experiments, and over 50% failed to reproduce one of their own experiments (Baker, 2016).
    In the area of computer science, while many of the findings from early years were derived
from mathematics and theoretical analysis, in recent years, new knowledge is increasingly
derived from practical experiments. Compared to other fields like biology, physics or so-
ciology where experiments are made in the natural or social world, the reliability and
reproducibility of experiments in computer science, where the experimental apparatus for
the most part consists of a computer designed and built by humans, should be much easier
to achieve. Yet in a surprisingly large number of instances, researchers have had difficulty
reproducing the work of others (Henderson et al., 2018).
    Focusing more narrowly on machine learning research, where most often the experiment
consists of training a model to learn to make predictions from observed data, the reasons
for this gap are numerous and include:

   • Lack of access to the same training data / differences in data distribution;

   • Misspecification or under-specification of the model or training procedure;

   • Lack of availability of the code necessary to run the experiments, or errors in the code;

   • Under-specification of the metrics used to report results;

   • Improper use of statistics to analyze results, such as claiming significance without
     proper statistical testing or using the wrong statistic test;

   • Selective reporting of results and ignoring the danger of adaptive overfitting;

   • Over-claiming of the results, by drawing conclusions that go beyond the evidence
     presented (e.g. insufficient number of experiments, mismatch between hypothesis &
     claim).

    We spend significant time and energy (both of machines and humans), trying to over-
come this gap. This is made worse by the bias in the field towards publishing positive results
(rather than negative ones). Indeed, the evidence threshold for publishing a new positive

                                               2
              Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research




finding is much lower than that for invalidating a previous finding. In the latter case, it
may require several teams showing beyond the shadow of a doubt that a result is false for
the research community to revise its opinion. Perhaps the most infamous instance of this is
that of the false causal link between vaccines and autism. In short, we would argue that it
is always more efficient to properly conduct the experiment and analysis in the first place.
    In 2019, the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) conference, the pre-
mier international conference for research in machine learning, introduced a reproducibility
program, designed to improve the standards across the community for how we conduct,
communicate, and evaluate machine learning research. The program contained three com-
ponents: a code submission policy, a community-wide reproducibility challenge, and the
inclusion of the Machine Learning Reproducibility checklist as part of the paper submission
process.
    In this paper, we describe each of these components, how it was deployed, as well as
what we were able to learn from this exercise. The goal is to better understand how such
an approach is implemented, how it is perceived by the community (including authors and
reviewers), and how it impacts the quality of the scientific work and the reliability of the
findings presented in the conference’s technical program. We hope that this work will
inform and inspire renewed commitment towards better scientific methodology, not only in
the machine learning research community, but in several other research fields.


2. Background

There are challenges regarding reproducibility that appear to be unique (or at least more
pronounced) in the field of ML compared to other disciplines. The first is an insufficient
exploration of the variables that might affect the conclusions of a study. In machine learning,
a common goal for a model is to beat the top benchmarks scores. However, it is hard to
assert if the aspect of a model claimed to have improved its performance is indeed the factor
leading to the higher score. This limitation has been highlighted in a few studies reporting
that new proposed methods are often not better than previous implementations when a
more thorough search of hyper-parameters is performed (Lucic et al., 2018; Melis et al.,
2017), or even when using different random parameter initializations ((Bouthillier et al.,
2019; Henderson et al., 2018).
    The second challenge refers to the proper documentation and reporting of the informa-
tion necessary to reproduce the reported results (Gundersen and Kjensmo, 2018). A recent
report indicated that 63.5% of the results in 255 manuscripts were successfully replicated
(Raff, 2019). Strikingly, this study found that when the original authors provided assistance
to the reproducers, 85% of results were successfully reproduced, compared to 4% when the
authors didn’t respond. Although a selection bias could be at play (authors who knew
their results would reproduce might have been more likely to provide assistance for the
reproduction), this contrasts with large-scale replication studies in other disciplines that
failed to observe similar improvement when the original authors of the study were involved
(Klein et al., 2019). It therefore remains to be established if the field is having a reproduc-
tion problem similar to the other fields, or if it would be better described as a reporting
problem.

                                              3
Pineau, Vincent-Lamarre, Sinha, Larivière, Beygelzimer, d’Alché-Buc, Fox, Larochelle




Figure 1: Reproducible Research. Adapted from: https://github.com/WhitakerLab/ReproducibleResearch


    Thirdly, as opposed to most scientific disciplines where uncertainty of the observed
effects are routinely quantified, it appears like statistical analysis is seldom conducted in
ML research (Forde and Paganini, 2019; Henderson et al., 2018).

2.1 Defining Reproducibility
Before going any further, it is worth defining a few terms that have been used (sometimes
interchangeably) to describe reproducibility & related concepts. We adopt the terminology
from Figure 1, where Reproducible work consists of re-doing an experiment using the same
data and same analytical tools, whereas Replicable work considers different data (presum-
ably sampled from similar distribution or method), Robust work assumes the same data but
different analysis (such as reimplementation of the code, perhaps different computer archi-
tecture), and Generalisable work leads to the same conclusions despite considering different
data and different analytical tools. For the purposes of our work, we focus primarily on the
notion of Reproducibility as defined here, and assume that any modification in analytical
tools (e.g. re-running experiments on a different computer) was small enough as to be neg-
ligible. A recent report by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine,
provides more in-depth discussion of these concepts, as well as several recommendations for
improving reproducibility broadly across scientific fields (National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine, 2019).

2.2 The Open Science movement
“Open Science is transparent and accessible knowledge that is shared and developed through
collaborative networks” (Vicente-Sáez and Martı́nez-Fuentes, 2018). In other words, Open
science is a movement to conduct science in a more transparent way. This includes making
code, data and scientific communications publicly available, increasing the transparency of
the research process and improving the reporting quality in scientific manuscripts. The
implementation of Open science practices has been identified as a core factor that could
improve the reproducibility of science (Munafò et al., 2017). As such, the NeurIPS repro-
ducibility program was designed to incorporate elements designed to encourage researchers
to share the artefacts of their research (code, data), in addition to their manuscripts.

                                             4
              Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research




2.3 Code submission policies
It has become increasingly common in recent years to require the sharing of data and
code, along with a paper, when computer experiments were used in the analysis. It is
now standard expectation in the Nature research journals for authors to provide access
to code and data to readers (Nature Research, 2021). Similarly, the policy at the journal
Science specifies that authors are expected to satisfy all reasonable requests for data, code
or materials (Science - AAAS, 2018). Within machine learning and AI conferences, the
ability to include supplementary material has now been standard for several years, and
many authors have used this to provide the data and/or code used to produce the paper.
More recently, ICML 2019, the second largest international conference in machine learning
has also rolled-out an explicit code submission policy (ICML, 2019).

2.4 Reproducibility challenges
The 2018 ICLR reproducibility challenge paved the way for the NeurIPS 2019 edition. The
goal of this first iteration was to investigate reproducibility of empirical results submit-
ted to the 2018 International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR, 2018). The
organizers chose ICLR for this challenge because the timing was right for course-based par-
ticipants: most participants were drawn from graduate machine learning courses, where
the challenge served as the final course project. The choice of ICLR was motivated by the
fact that papers submitted to the conference were automatically made available publicly on
OpenReview, including during the review period. This means anyone in the world could
access the paper prior to selection, and could interact with the authors via the message
board on OpenReview. This first challenge was followed a year later by the 2019 ICLR
Reproducibility Challenge (Pineau et al., 2019).
    Several less formal activities, including hackathons, course projects, online blogs, open-
source code packages, have participated in the effort to carry out re-implementation and
replication of previous work and should be considered in the same spirit as the effort de-
scribed here.

2.5 Checklists
The Checklist Manifesto presents a highly compelling case for the use of checklists in safety-
critical systems (Gawande, 2010). It documents how pre-flight checklists were introduced
at Boeing Corporation as early as 1935 following the unfortunate crash of an airplane
prototype. Checklists are similarly used in surgery rooms across the world to prevent
oversights. Similarly, the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist, which is employed in surgery
rooms across the world, has been shown to significantly reduce morbidity and mortality
(Clay-Williams and Colligan, 2015).
    In the case of scientific manuscripts, reporting checklists are meant to provide the mini-
mal information that must be included in a manuscript, and are not necessarily exhaustive.
The use of checklists in scientific research has been explored in a few instances. Reporting
guidelines in the form of checklists have been introduced for a wide range of study design in
health research (The EQUATOR Network, 2021), and the Transparency and Openness Pro-
motion (TOP) guidelines have been adopted by multiple journals across disciplines (Nosek

                                              5
Pineau, Vincent-Lamarre, Sinha, Larivière, Beygelzimer, d’Alché-Buc, Fox, Larochelle




et al., 2015). There are now more than 400 checklists registered in the EQUATOR Network.
CONSORT, one of the most popular guidelines used for randomized controlled trials was
found to be effective and to improve the completeness of reporting for 22 checklist items
(Turner et al., 2012). The ML checklist described below was significantly influenced by
Nature’s Reporting Checklist for Life Sciences Articles (Checklist, 2021). Other guidelines
are under development outside of the ML community, namely for the application of AI tools
in clinical trials (Liu et al., 2019) and health-care (Collins and Moons, 2019).

2.6 Other considerations
Beyond reproducibility, there are several other factors that affect how scientific research is
conducted, communicated and evaluated. One of the best practices used in many venues,
including NeurIPS, is that of double-blind reviewing. It is worth remembering that in 2014,
the then program chairs Neil Lawrence and Corinna Cortes ran an interesting experiment,
by assigning 10% of submitted papers to be reviewed independently by two groups of review-
ers (each lead by a different area chair). The results were surprising: overall the reviewers
disagreed on 25.9% of papers, but when tasked with reaching a 22.5% acceptance rate, they
disagreed on 57% of the list of accepted papers. We raise this point for two reasons. First,
to emphasize that the NeurIPS community has for many years already demonstrated an
openness towards trying new approaches, as well as looking introspectively on the effec-
tiveness of its processes. Second, to emphasize that there are several steps that come into
play when a paper is written, and selected for publication at a high-profile international
venue, and that a reproducibility program is only one aspect to consider when designing
community standards to improve the quality of scientific practices.

3. The NeurIPS 2019 code submission policy
The NeurIPS 2019 code submission policy, as defined for all authors (see Appendix, Figure
6), was drafted by the program chairs and officially approved by the NeurIPS board in
winter 2019 (before the May 2019 paper submission deadline.)
    The most frequent objections we heard to having a code submission policy (at all)
include:

   • Dataset confidentiality: There are cases where the dataset cannot be released for
     legitimate privacy reasons. This arises often when looking at applications of ML, for
     example in healthcare or finance. One strategy to mitigate this limitation is to provide
     complementary empirical results on an open-source benchmark dataset, in addition
     to the results on the confidential data.

   • Proprietary software: The software used to derive the result contains intellectual
     property, or is built on top of proprietary libraries. This is of particular concern to
     some researchers working in industry. Nonetheless, as shown in Figure 2a, we see
     that many authors from industry were indeed able to submit code, and furthermore
     despite the policy, the acceptance rate for papers from authors in industry remained
     high (higher than authors from academia (Figure 2b)). By the camera-ready deadline,
     most submissions from the industry reported having submitted code (Figure 2a,b).

                                              6
              Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research




   • Computation infrastructure: Even if data and code are provided, the experiments
     may require so much computation (time & number of machines) that it is impractical
     for any reviewer, or in fact most researchers, to attempt reproducing the work. This
     is the case for work on training very large neural models, for example the AlphaGo
     game playing agent (Silver et al., 2016) or the BERT language model (Devlin et al.,
     2018). Nonetheless it is worth noting that both these systems have been reproduced
     within months (if not weeks) of their release.
   • Replication of mistakes: Having a copy of the code used to produce the exper-
     imental results is not a guarantee that this code is correct, and there is significant
     value in reimplementing an algorithm directly from its description in a paper. This
     speaks more to the notion of Robustness defined above. It is indeed common that
     there are mistakes in code (as there may be in proofs for more theoretical papers).
     Nonetheless, the availability of the code (or proof) can be tremendously helpful to
     verify or re-implement the method. It is indeed much easier to verify a result (with
     the initial code or proof), then it is to produce from nothing (this is perhaps most
     poignantly illustrated by the longevity of the lack of proof for Fermat’s last theorem
     (Wikipedia, 2020).)

    It is worth noting that the NeurIPS 2019 code submission policy leaves significant time
& flexibility, in particular it says that it: “expects code only for accepted papers, and
only by the camera-ready deadline”. So code submission is not mandatory, and the code
is not expected to be used during the review process to decide on the soundness of the work.
Reviewers were asked as a part of their assessment to report if code was provided along the
manuscript at the initial submission stage. About 40% of authors reported that they had
provided code at this stage which was confirmed by the reviewers (if at least one reviewer
indicated that the code was provided for each submission) for 71.5% of those submissions
(Figure 2d). Note that authors are still able to provide code (or a link to code) as part of
their initial submission. In Table 1, we provide a summary of code submission frequency for
ICML 2019, as well as NeurIPS 2018 and 2019. We observe a growing trend towards more
papers adding a link to code, even with only soft encouragement and no coercive measures.
    While the value of having code extends long beyond the review period, it is useful, in
those cases where code is available during the review process, to know how it is used and
perceived by the reviewers. When surveying reviewers at the end of the review period, we
found:

     Q. Was code provided (e.g. in the supplementary material)? Yes: 5298
     If provided, did you look at the code? Yes: 2255
     If provided, was the code useful in guiding your review? Yes: 1315
     If not provided, did you wish code had been available? Yes: 3881

    We were positively surprised by the number of reviewers willing to engage with this type
of artefact during the review process. Furthermore, we found that the availability of code
at submission (as indicated on the checklist) was positively associated with the reviewer
score (p < 1e − 08).

                                             7
Pineau, Vincent-Lamarre, Sinha, Larivière, Beygelzimer, d’Alché-Buc, Fox, Larochelle




Figure 2: (a) Link to code provided at initial submission and camera-ready, as a function of
affiliation of the first and last authors. (b) Acceptance rate of submissions as a function of affiliation
of the first and last authors. The red dashed line shows the acceptance rate for all submissions.
(c) Diagram representing the transition of the code availability from initial submission to camera-
ready only for submissions with an author from the industry (first or last). All results presented
here for code availability are based on the author’s self-response in the checklist. (d) Percentage
of submissions reporting that they provided code on the checklist subsequently confirmed by the
reviewers.




                                                    8
               Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research




Conference       # papers     % papers   % papers w/code   % papers w/code   Code submission policy
                 submitted    accepted   at submission     at camera-ready
NeurIPS 2018     4856         20.8                         <50%              “Authors may submit up to
                                                                             100MB of supplementary ma-
                                                                             terial, such as proofs, deriva-
                                                                             tions, data, or source code.”
ICML 2019        3424         22.6       36%               67%               “To foster reproducibility, we
                                                                             highly encourage authors to
                                                                             submit code. Reproducibility
                                                                             of results and easy availability
                                                                             of code will be taken into ac-
                                                                             count in the decision-making
                                                                             process.”
NeurIPS 2019     6743         21.1       40%               74.4%             “We expect (but not require)
                                                                             accompanying code to be sub-
                                                                             mitted with accepted papers
                                                                             that contribute and present
                                                                             experiments with a new algo-
                                                                             rithm.” See Appendix, Fig. 6

Table 1: Code submission frequency for recent ML conferences. Source for number of papers
accepted and acceptance rates: https://github.com/lixin4ever/Conference-Acceptance-Rate. ICML
2019 numbers reproduced from the ICML 2019 Code-at-Submit-Time Experiment.

 Conference                  # papers     Acceptance       # papers      #        par-      # reports
                             submitted    rate             claimed       ticipating         reviewed
                                                                         institutions
 ICLR 2018                   981          32.0             123           31                 n/a
 ICLR 2019                   1591         31.4             90            35                 26
 NeurIPS 2019                6743         21.1             173           73                 84

Table 2: Participation in the Reproducibility Challenge. Source for number of papers accepted and
acceptance rates: https://github.com/lixin4ever/Conference-Acceptance-Rate


4. The NeurIPS 2019 Reproducibility Challenge
The main goal of this challenge is to provide independent verification of the empirical claims
in accepted NeurIPS papers, and to leave a public trace of the findings from this secondary
analysis. The reproducibility challenge officially started on Oct.31 2019, right after the final
paper submission deadline, so that participants could have the benefit of any code submis-
sion by authors. By this time, the authors’ identity was also known, allowing collaborative
interaction between participants and authors. We used OpenReview (OpenReview.net,
2021) to enable communication between authors and challenge participants.
    As shown in Table 2, a total of 173 papers were claimed for reproduction. This is a 92%
increase since the last reproducibility challenge at ICLR 2019 (Pineau et al., 2019). We
had participants from 73 different institutions distributed around the world (see Appendix,
Figure 7), including 63 universities and 10 industrial labs. Institutions with the most par-
ticipants came from 3 continents and include McGill University (Canada), KTH (Sweden),
Brown University (US) and IIT Roorkee (India). In those cases (and several others), high
participation rate occurred when a professor at the university used this challenge as a final
course project.

                                                 9
Pineau, Vincent-Lamarre, Sinha, Larivière, Beygelzimer, d’Alché-Buc, Fox, Larochelle




    All reports submitted to the challenge are available on OpenReview 1 for the community;
in many cases with a link to the reimplementation code. The goal of making these available
is to two-fold: first to give examples of reproducibility reports so that the practice becomes
more widespread in the community, and second so that other researchers can benefit from
the knowledge, and avoid the pitfalls that invariably come with reproducing another team’s
work. While many readers may be looking for a simple answer to the question Is this paper
reproducible? There is rarely such a concise outcome to a reproducibility study. Most
reports produced during the challenge offer a much more detailed & nuanced account of
their efforts, and the level of fidelity to which they could reproduce the methods, results &
claims of each paper. Similarly, while some readers may be looking for a “reproducibility
score”, we have not found that the findings of most reproducibility studies lend themselves
to such a coarse summary.
    Once submitted, all reproducibility reports underwent a review cycle (by reviewers of
the NeurIPS conference), to select a small number of high-quality reports, which will be
published in an upcoming edition of the journal ReScience (ReScience C, 2021). This
provides a lasting archival record for this new type of research artefact.

5. The NeurIPS 2019 ML reproducibility checklist
The third component of the reproducibility program involved use of the Machine Learning
reproducibility checklist (see Appendix, Figure 8). This checklist was first proposed in late
2018, at the NeurIPS conference, in response to findings of recurrent gaps in experimental
methodology found in recent machine learning papers. An earlier version (v.1.1) was first
deployed as a trial with submission of the final camera-ready version for NeurIPS 2018
papers (due in January 2019); this initial test allowed collection of feedback from authors
and some minor modifications to the content of the checklist. The edited version 1.2 was
then deployed during the NeurIPS 2019 review process, and authors were obliged to fill
it both at the initial paper submission phase (May 2019), and at the final camera-ready
phase (October 2019). This allowed us to analyze any change in answers, which presumably
resulted from the review feedback (or authors’ own improvements of the work). The checklist
was implemented on the CMT platform; each question included a multiple choice “Yes, No,
not applicable”, and an (optional) open comment field.
    Figure 3 shows the initial answers provided for each submitted paper. It is reassuring to
see that 97% of submissions are said to contain Q#. A clear description of the mathematical
setting, algorithm, and/or model. Since we expect all papers to contain this, the 3% no/na
answers might reflect margin of error in how authors interpreted the questions. Next, we
notice that 89% of submissions answered to the affirmative when asked Q#. For all figures
and tables that present empirical results, indicate if you include: A description of how
experiments were run. This is reasonably consistent with the fact that 9% of NeurIPS 2019
submissions indicated “Theory” as their primary subject area, and thus may not contain
empirical results.
    One set of responses that raises interesting questions is the following trio:

     Q#. A clear definition of the specific measure or statistics used to report results.
1. https://openreview.net/group?id=NeurIPS.cc/2019/Reproducibility Challenge


                                               10
               Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research




    Figure 3: Author responses to all checklist questions for NeurIPS 2019 submitted papers.




Figure 4: Acceptance rate per question. The numbers within each bar show the number of submis-
sions for each answer. See Fig. 3 (and in Appendix Fig. 8) for text corresponding to each Question
# (x-axis). The red dashed line shows the acceptance rate for all submissions.


      Q#. Clearly defined error bars.

      Q#. A description of results with central tendency (e.g. mean) & variation (e.g.
      stddev).

    In particular, it seems surprising to have 87% of papers that see value in clearly defining
the metrics and statistics used, yet 36% of papers judge that error bars are not applicable
to their results.

                                               11
Pineau, Vincent-Lamarre, Sinha, Larivière, Beygelzimer, d’Alché-Buc, Fox, Larochelle




Figure 5: Perceived usefulness of the ML reproducibility checklist vs the review outcomes. (a)
Effect on the paper score (scale 1-10). (b) Effect on the reviewer confidence score (scale of 1 to 5,
where 1 is lowest). (c) Effect on the final accept/reject decision.


    As shown in Figure 4, many checklist answers appear to be associated with a higher
acceptance rate when the answer is “yes”. However, it is too early to rule out potential
covariates (e.g. paper’s topic, reviewer expectations, etc.) At this stage, it is encouraging
that answering “no” to any of the questions is not associated with a higher acceptance rate.
There seems to be a higher acceptance rate associated with “NA” responses on a subset of
questions related to “Figures and tables”. Although it is still unclear at this stage why this
effect is observed, it disappears when we only include manuscripts for which the reviewers
indicated that the checklist was useful for the review.
    Finally, it is worth considering the reviewers’ point of view on the usefulness of the
ML checklist to assess the soundness of the papers. When asked “Were the Reproducibility
Checklist answers useful for evaluating the submission?”, 34% responded Yes.
    We also note, as shown in Figure 5, that reviewers who found the checklist useful gave
higher scores. And that those who found the checklist useful or not useful were more
confident in their assessment than those who had not read the checklist. Finally, papers
where the checklist was assessed as useful were more likely to be accepted.

6. Discussion
We presented a summary of the activities & findings from the NeurIPS 2019 reproducibility
program. Perhaps the best way to think of this effort is as a case study showing how three
different mechanisms (code submission, reproducibility challenge, reproducibility checklist)
can be incorporated into a conference program in an attempt to improve the quality of sci-
entific contributions. At this stage, we do not have concluding evidence that these processes
indeed have an impact on the quality of the work or of the papers that are submitted and
published.
    However we note several encouraging indicators:

   • The number of submissions to NeurIPS increased by nearly 40% this year, therefore
     we can assume the changes introduced did not result in a significant drop of interest
     by authors to submit their work to NeurIPS.

   • The number of authors willingly submitting code is quickly increasing, from less than
     50% a year ago, to nearly 75%. It seems a code submission policy based on volun-

                                                 12
              Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research




     tary participation is sufficient at this time. We are not necessarily aiming for 100%
     compliance, as there are some cases where this may not be desirable.

   • The number of reviewers indicating that they consulted the code, or wished to consult
     it is in the 1000’s, indicating that this is useful in the review process.

   • The number of participants in the reproducibility challenge continues to increase, as
     does the number of reproducibility reports, and reviewers of reproducibility reports.
     This suggests that an increasing segment of the community is willing to participate
     voluntarily in secondary analysis of research results.

   • One-third of reviewers found the checklist answers useful, furthermore reviewers who
     found the checklist useful gave higher scores to the paper, which suggests the check-
     list’s use is useful for both reviewers and authors.

    The work leaves several questions open, which would require further investigation, and
a careful study design to elucidate:

   • What is the long-term value (e.g. reproducibility, robustness, generalization, impact
     of follow-up work) of the code submitted?

   • What is the effect of different incentive mechanisms (e.g. cash payment, conference
     registration, a point/badge system) on the participation rate & quality of work in the
     reproducibility challenge?

   • What is the benefit of using the checklist for authors?

   • What is the accuracy of the ML checklist answers (for each question) when filled by
     authors?

   • What is the measurable effect of the checklist on the quality of the final paper, e.g.
     in terms of soundness of results, clarity of writing?

   • What is the measurable effect of the checklist on the review process, in terms of
     reliability (e.g. inter-rater agreement) and efficiency (e.g. need for response/rebuttal,
     discussion time)?

    A related direction to explore is the development of tools and platforms that enhance re-
producibility. Throughout this work we have focused on processes & guidelines, but stayed
away from prescribing any infrastructure or software tooling to support reproducibility.
Software containers, such as Docker, can encapsulate operating systems components, code
and data into a single package. Standardization of such tools would help sharing of infor-
mation and improve ease of reproducibility.
    In conclusion, one aspect worth emphasizing is the fact that achieving reproducible
results across a research community, whether NeurIPS or another, requires a significant
cultural and organizational changes, not just a code submission policy or a checklist. The
initiative described here is just one step in helping the community adopt better practices,
in terms of conducting, communicating, and evaluating scientific research. The NeurIPS

                                             13
Pineau, Vincent-Lamarre, Sinha, Larivière, Beygelzimer, d’Alché-Buc, Fox, Larochelle




community is far from alone in looking at this problem. Several workshops have been
held in recent years to discuss the issue as it pertains to machine learning and computer
science (SIGCOMM, 2017; ICML, 2017, 2018; ICLR, 2019). Specific calls for reproducibility
papers have been issued (ECIR, 2020). An open-access peer-reviewed journal is dedicated
to such papers (ReScience C, 2021), which was used to publish select reports in ICLR 2019
Reproducibility Challenge (Pineau et al., 2019). And in the process, many labs are changing
their practices to improve reproducibility of their own results.


Acknowledgments

We thank the NeurIPS board and the NeurIPS 2019 general chair (Hanna Wallach) their
unfailing support of this initiative. Without their courage and spirit of experimentation,
none of this work would have been possible. We thank the many authors who submitted
their work to NeurIPS 2019 and agreed to participate in this large experiment. We thank the
program committee (reviewers, area chairs) of NeurIPS 2019 who not only incorporated the
reproducibility checklist into their task flow, but also provided feedback about its usefulness.
We thank Zhenyu (Sherry) Xue for preparing the data on NeurIPS papers & reviews for the
analysis presented here. We thank the OpenReview team (in particular Andrew McCallum,
Pam Mandler, Melisa Bok, Michael Spector and Mohit Uniyal) who provided support to
host the results of the reproducibility challenge. We thank CodeOcean (in particular Xu
Fei) for providing free compute resources to reproducibility challenge participants. Thank
you to Robert Stojnic for valuable comments on an early version of the manuscript. Finally,
we thank the several participants of the reproducibility challenge who dedicated time and
effort to verify results that were not their own, to help strengthen our understanding of
machine learning, and the types of problems we can solve today. This work was supported
by the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) and the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)

References
Monya Baker. 1,500 scientists lift the lid on reproducibility. Nature News, 533
 (7604):452, May 2016. doi: 10.1038/533452a. URL https://www.nature.com/news/
 1-500-scientists-lift-the-lid-on-reproducibility-1.19970.

Xavier Bouthillier, César Laurent, and Pascal Vincent. Unreproducible research is repro-
  ducible. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of the
  36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, pages 725–734, Long Beach, California, USA, 09–15 Jun 2019.
  PMLR. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/bouthillier19a.html.

Nature Checklist. Nature checklist. 2021. URL https://media.nature.com/original/
 nature-assets/ng/journal/v49/n10/extref/ng.3933-S2.pdf.

Robyn Clay-Williams and Lacey Colligan. Back to basics: Checklists in aviation and health-
  care. BMJ Quality & Safety, 24(7):428–431, July 2015. ISSN 2044-5415, 2044-5423. doi:
  10.1136/bmjqs-2015-003957.

                                              14
             Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research




Gary S. Collins and Karel G. M. Moons. Reporting of artificial intelligence prediction
 models. The Lancet, 393(10181):1577–1579, April 2019. ISSN 0140-6736, 1474-547X. doi:
 10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30037-6.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training
  of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. arXiv:1810.04805 [cs],
  October 2018.

ECIR. Call for Reproducibility papers. April 2020. URL ecir2020.org.

Jessica Zosa Forde and Michela Paganini. The Scientific Method in the Science of Machine
  Learning. arXiv:1904.10922 [cs, stat], April 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.
  10922.

Atul Gawande. Checklist manifesto, the (HB). Penguin Books India, 2010.

Odd Erik Gundersen and Sigbjørn Kjensmo. State of the art: Reproducibility in artificial
 intelligence. In Thirty-second AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2018.

Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David
  Meger. Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.

ICLR. ICLR 2018 Reproducibility Challenge. 2018. URL https://www.cs.mcgill.ca/
  ~jpineau/ICLR2018-ReproducibilityChallenge.html.
ICLR. Reproducibility in Machine Learning Workshop. 2019. URL https://sites.
  google.com/view/icml-reproducibility-workshop/home.

ICML.      Reproducibility in Machine Learning Workshop.      2017.     URL
  https://sites.google.com/view/icml-reproducibility-workshop/icml2017/
  talks-and-abstracts.

ICML. Reproducibility in Machine Learning Workshop. 2018. URL https://sites.
  google.com/view/icml-reproducibility-workshop/icml2018/home.

ICML. Call for papers. 2019. URL https://icml.cc/Conferences/2019/CallForPapers.

Richard A Klein, Corey L Cook, Charles R Ebersole, Christine Vitiello, Brian A Nosek,
  Christopher R Chartier, Cody D Christopherson, Samuel Clay, Brian Collisson, Jarret
  Crawford, et al. Many labs 4: Failure to replicate mortality salience effect with and
  without original author involvement. 2019.

Xiaoxuan Liu, Livia Faes, Melanie J Calvert, and Alastair K Denniston. Extension of the
  consort and spirit statements. The Lancet, 394(10205):1225, 2019.

Mario Lucic, Karol Kurach, Marcin Michalski, Sylvain Gelly, and Olivier Bousquet. Are
 gans created equal? a large-scale study. In Advances in neural information processing
 systems, pages 700–709, 2018.

                                          15
Pineau, Vincent-Lamarre, Sinha, Larivière, Beygelzimer, d’Alché-Buc, Fox, Larochelle




Gábor Melis, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. On the state of the art of evaluation in neural
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.05589, 2017.
Marcus R Munafò, Brian A Nosek, Dorothy VM Bishop, Katherine S Button, Christopher D
 Chambers, Nathalie Percie Du Sert, Uri Simonsohn, Eric-Jan Wagenmakers, Jennifer J
 Ware, and John PA Ioannidis. A manifesto for reproducible science. Nature human
 behaviour, 1(1):1–9, 2017.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Reproducibility and replicability
 in science. National Academies Press, 2019.
Nature Research. Reporting standards and availability of data, materials, code and pro-
 tocols, 2021. URL https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/
 reporting-standards.
Brian A Nosek, George Alter, George C Banks, Denny Borsboom, Sara D Bowman, Steven J
  Breckler, Stuart Buck, Christopher D Chambers, Gilbert Chin, Garret Christensen, et al.
  Promoting an open research culture. Science, 348(6242):1422–1425, 2015.
OpenReview.net. Neurips 2019 reproducibility challenge, 2021. URL https://openreview.
 net/group?id=NeurIPS.cc/2019/Reproducibility_Challenge.
Joelle Pineau, Koustuv Sinha, Genevieve Fried, Rosemary Nan Ke, and Hugo Larochelle.
  ICLR Reproducibility Challenge 2019. ReScience C, 5(2):5, May 2019. doi: 10.5281/
  zenodo.3158244. URL https://zenodo.org/record/3158244/files/article.pdf.
Edward Raff. A step toward quantifying independently reproducible machine learning re-
  search. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 5486–5496, 2019.
ReScience C. The rescience journal. reproducible science is good. replicated science is
  better., 2021. URL http://rescience.github.io/.
Science - AAAS. Science journals: Editorial policies., 2018. URL https://www.
  sciencemag.org/authors/science-journals-editorial-policies.
SIGCOMM. Reproducibility ’17: Proceedings of the reproducibility workshop. 2017. URL
  https://dl.acm.org/doi/proceedings/10.1145/3097766.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van
  Den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc
  Lanctot, et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search.
  nature, 529(7587):484, 2016.
The EQUATOR Network. Enhancing the quality and transparency of health research.,
 2021. URL https://www.equator-network.org/.
Lucy Turner, Larissa Shamseer, Douglas G Altman, Laura Weeks, Jodi Peters, Thilo Kober,
  Sofia Dias, Kenneth F Schulz, Amy C Plint, and David Moher. Consolidated standards
  of reporting trials (consort) and the completeness of reporting of randomised controlled
  trials (rcts) published in medical journals. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
  (11), 2012.

                                            16
             Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research




Rubén Vicente-Sáez and Clara Martı́nez-Fuentes. Open science now: A systematic literature
 review for an integrated definition. Journal of business research, 88:428–436, 2018.

Wikipedia. Fermat’s Last Theorem. March 2020. URL https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
 Fermat%27s_Last_Theorem. Page Version ID: 944945734.




                                            17
Pineau, Vincent-Lamarre, Sinha, Larivière, Beygelzimer, d’Alché-Buc, Fox, Larochelle




Appendix A.




Figure 6: The NeurIPS 2019 code submission policy. Reproduced (with permission) from: [ADD
URL




                                           18
          Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research




Figure 7: NeurIPS 2019 Reproducibility Challenge Participants by geographical location.




                                          19
Pineau, Vincent-Lamarre, Sinha, Larivière, Beygelzimer, d’Alché-Buc, Fox, Larochelle




Figure 8: The Machine Learning Reproducibility Checklist, version 1.2, used during the NeurIPS
2019 review process.


                                             20
