# Released evidence excerpt 2010.06595: statistical power norms


Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2010.06595
GitHub: https://github.com/oldsphere/BigRodent

With Little Power Comes Great Responsibility
Dallas Card
1 
Peter Henderson
1 
Urvashi Khandelwal
1 
Robin Jia
1
Kyle Mahowald
2 
Dan Jurafsky
1
1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA
2
University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA
dcard@stanford.edu, phend@stanford.edu,
urvashik@stanford.edu, robinjia@stanford.edu,
mahowald@ucsb.edu, jurafsky@stanford.edu
Abstract
Despite its importance to experimental design,
statistical power (the probability that, given
a real effect, an experiment will reject the
null hypothesis) has largely been ignored by
the NLP community. Underpowered experi-
ments make it more difficult to discern the
difference between statistical noise and mean-
ingful model improvements, and increase the
chances of exaggerated findings. By meta-
analyzing a set of existing NLP papers and
datasets, we characterize typical power for a
variety of settings and conclude that under-
powered experiments are common in the NLP
literature. In particular, for several tasks in
the popular GLUE benchmark, small test sets
mean that most attempted comparisons to state
of the art models will not be adequately pow-
ered. Similarly, based on reasonable assump-
tions, we find that the most typical experimen-
tal design for human rating studies will be un-
derpowered to detect small model differences,
of the sort that are frequently studied. For ma-
chine translation, we find that typical test sets
of 2000 sentences have approximately 75%
power to detect differences of 1 BLEU point.
To improve the situation going forward, we
give an overview of best practices for power
analysis in NLP and release a series of note-
books to assist with future power analyses.
1
1 Introduction
Despite its importance to empirical evaluation, rel-
atively little attention has been paid to statistical
power in NLP. In particular, if it is the case that
typical experiments in NLP are underpowered, not
only would we expect many meaningful improve-
ments to go undetected, we would also expect many
apparently significant differences to be exagger-
ated (Gelman and Carlin, 2014). In this paper,
we build on past work calling for greater rigor
1
https://github.com/dallascard/NLP-power-analysis
A B
0
25
50
75
100
True pref. (%)
trials with n=100
Obs pref. for B
trials with n=25
Obs pref. for B
Figure 1: Cartoon example of statistical power in com-
paring two models: 65% of all people in the population
always prefer system B (left). A comparison using a
sample of 100 people would be well-powered (middle):
over 80% of such samples will show a significant dif-
ference (plotted in red) from the null hypothesis that
the models are equally good (dashed line). In samples
of 25 people (right), far fewer tests will be significant
(power ≈ 30%). Note that the observed mean of sig-
nificant findings (dotted line) slightly overestimates the
true proportion that prefer system B when n = 100 and
more severely overestimates it when n = 25.
in evaluation (McCoy et al., 2019; Azer et al.,
2020), including the need for careful hypothesis
testing (Koehn, 2004; Berg-Kirkpatrick et al., 2012;
Søgaard et al., 2014; Dror et al., 2018), and show
why and how power matters to NLP, addressing
challenges unique to this domain.
Roughly speaking, power is the probability that
a statistical test will successfully detect a true effect.
As an illustrative example, imagine comparing two
dialog systems (see Figure 1). We want to know if
people tend to prefer one system over the other. To
test this, we will need multiple people to evaluate
the systems. But how many? Once we have col-
lected data, a statistical test will tell us if we can
reject the null hypothesis the systems are equally
good. Assuming the systems are not identical, sta-
tistical power is the probability that the experiment
will return a significant result (or equivalently, it is
one minus the probability of failing to detect the
difference as significant). Although we don’t know
the magnitude of this difference, power analysis
helps to estimate how much power an experiment
arXiv:2010.06595v1 [cs.CL] 13 Oct 2020

will have under various assumptions.
Power depends on multiple factors, including
the statistical test used, the significance threshold,
true effect size, variance, and sample size. All else
being equal, experiments with larger samples will
have greater power than smaller samples, as shown
in Figure 1. Similarly, larger effects and those
with less variance are easier to detect, and there-
fore require fewer samples for equivalent power.
Importantly, note that if we do find a significant
difference, this does not imply that the experiment
had high power.
2
Proceeding with a test that is underpowered (i.e.,
too few subjects or items; often taken to mean
less than 80% power; Cohen, 1962) means that
one is less likely to be able to draw any useful
statistical conclusion from the experiment, and has
contributed, in part, to the replication crisis in other
fields (Button et al., 2013; Szucs and Ioannidis,
2017; Ioannidis et al., 2017). Routinely running
experiments with low statistical power undermines
the scientific enterprise. Not only will true effects
go undetected; when significant effects are found,
they are likely to be noisier and have lower positive
predictive value (Button et al., 2013).
Moreover, significant findings from underpow-
ered experiments are more likely to exaggerate or
reverse the true effect – so-called Type-M (magni-
tude) and Type-S (sign) errors, respectively (Gel-
man and Carlin, 2014). This problem can lead to
systematic distortions in the literature if only sig-
nificant findings are published, especially if these
results are based on underpowered experiments
(Scargle, 1999). The effect of Type-M error can
be seen in Figure 1; significant differences are less
likely to be found in smaller samples (right), but
among those tests that are significant, the observed
difference will tend to exaggerate the true differ-
ence (left) by more than a larger sample (middle).
For further discussion of Type-M and Type-S er-
rors, please refer to Appendix B.
Here, we investigate how these issues affect NLP.
Although retrospective analysis of power involves
challenges, we present evidence that underpow-
ered experiments are widespread in NLP research.
Among human evaluations, we find most experi-
mental designs involve too few items and/or raters
2
Using the observed outcome from a single experiment
to compute power falls into the trap of post-hoc power anal-
ysis and is not recommended. For additional background on
statistical power, power analysis, null-hypothesis significance
testing, and post-hoc analysis, please refer to Appendix A.
to detect small effects ( §5). For comparing models
in terms of accuracy, we find that some widely used
benchmark datasets, including MRPC and SST-2,
are now too small to be able to properly measure
future progress against top performing models (§3).
We also introduce a novel approach to power analy-
sis for machine translation and characterize power
in experiments testing for differences in BLEU
(§ 4). Finally, a survey of recent papers reveals a
general lack of statistical evaluation and a dearth
of detailed reporting (§5.1).
To improve future practice, we suggest broader
adoption of power analyses prior to evaluation, pro-
vide guidance on running power analyses in NLP,
and release a series of notebooks for this purpose.
2 Power Analysis for NLP
Because most NLP tasks do not take the form of
standard experiments in other sciences (Kraemer
and Blasey, 2015; Westfall et al., 2014), it is non-
trivial to run power analyses for many tasks of
interest. While we cannot cover every scenario,
we present here a generalizable, simulation-based
approach to power analysis, along with three sam-
ple applications, which can be extended as neces-
sary. Such an approach is modular, reusable, and
transparent, and encourages planning of analyses
in advance of data collection.
Every power analysis requires assumptions, and
there is not likely to be a single correct approach.
Rather, the point is to make one’s assumptions ex-
plicit, and include enough detail so as to account
for whatever is likely to be observed. By using
reasonable assumptions, one can help to ensure
that one’s experiment is sufficiently well-powered,
In the case of NLP, this means that one recruits
enough subjects, collects enough ratings, or uses a
large enough test set.
The general procedure we suggest for power
analysis is described in detail in Figure 2. At a
high level, the idea is to estimate power by running
simulations. Recall that power is the probability
of detecting a true effect, conditional on the ex-
perimental setting (effect size, variance, etc.) and
significance threshold. Thus, if one can translate
these assumptions into a process for generating
simulated data, we can estimate power by gener-
ating many simulated datasets using assumed or
estimated parameter values, running each sample
through a significance test, and reporting the pro-
portion that are found to be significant.

Define a generative process G(n, e
∗
, h) parameterized by
number of items, n, hypothesized effect e
∗ 
for the statistic of
interest E, and other relevant parameters h (e.g., variance).
Also choose a statistical test T (D), which returns a p-value
p when performed on data D sampled from G(n, e
∗
, h).
Finally, choose the size of the dataset to be sampled, n,
significance threshold, α, and number of repetitions, r.
1. For i in range(r):
• sample a dataset of size n, D
i 
∼ G(n, e
∗
, h)
• compute the effect of interest on this sample,
e
i 
= E(D
i
)
• also compute a p-value according to the test of
interest: p
i 
= T (D
i
)
2. Power ≈ 
1
r
∑
(I[p
i 
≤ α] · I[sign(e
i
) = sign(e
∗
)])
Figure 2: An algorithm for power analysis by simu-
lation. For the example of comparing two systems
presented in Figure 1, e
∗ 
is the assumed overall pro-
portion of people who prefer system B, relative to
the null hypothesis, p = 0.5, G(n, e
∗
, h) is simply
Binomial(n, 0.5 + e
∗
), while e
i 
is the observed propor-
tion of people who prefer system B in sample i, again
relative to 0.5. For extensions to estimate Type-M and
Type-S error, see Appendix B.
The key to generalizing this approach is to begin
with the end in mind. In particular, if one plans to
test for a difference between models, one needs to
choose the statistical test that will be used. That
test will determine the level of detail required in
the generative process for simulating data.
To return to the opening example of evaluating
dialog systems, we want to test if people prefer one
system over the other (Ai et al., 2007). If we ig-
nore the nuances of human preference for now (but
see § 5 for a more nuanced approach), and simply
assume that each person either prefers system A or
system B, the only assumption we need to make
for a power analysis in this setting is the proportion
of people in the population who prefer system B.
We can then simulate samples of n people (each
of whom independently has the same probability
of preferring system B) as a draw from a binomial
distribution, and repeat this thousands of times.
3
For each sample, we then test whether the propor-
tion of people who prefer system B is significantly
different from 0.5. The estimated power of this ex-
periment would thus be the proportion of simulated
differences that are found to be significant.
4
3
We don’t need to address variance in this scenario, as the
variance of a binomial distribution is a function of its mean.
4
More direct solutions are available for some settings, in-
cluding this one (see Appendix E.5), but we describe it using
The most difficult part of power analyses is es-
timating the relevant q