Reference Layout Columns columns Element Question mark Element functions can be customized with set and show rules. Go to source Separates a region into multiple equally sized columns. The column function lets you separate the interior of any container into multiple columns. It will currently not balance the height of the columns. Instead, the columns will take up the height of their container or the remaining height on the page. Support for balanced columns is planned for the future. When arranging content across multiple columns, use colbreak to explicitly continue in the next column. Example Copy # columns ( 2 , gutter: 8pt )[
  This text is in the
  first column. # colbreak ()

  This text is in the
  second column.
] Page-level columns If you need to insert columns across your whole document, use the page function’s columns parameter instead. This will create the columns directly at the page-level rather than wrapping all of your content in a layout container. As a result, things like pagebreaks , footnotes , and line numbers will continue to work as expected. For more information, also read the relevant part of the page setup guide . Breaking out of columns To temporarily break out of columns (e.g. for a paper’s title), use parent-scoped floating placement: Copy # set page (columns: 2 , height: 150pt ) # place (
  top + center,
  scope: "parent" ,
  float: true , text ( 1.4em , weight: "bold" )[
    My document
  ],
) # lorem ( 40 ) Parameters columns ( int , gutter : relative , content , ) → content count int Positional Question mark Positional parameters are specified in order, without names. Settable Question mark Settable parameters can be customized for all following uses of the function with a set rule. Default: 2 The number of columns. gutter relative Settable Question mark Settable parameters can be customized for all following uses of the function with a set rule. Default: 4% + 0pt The size of the gutter space between each column. body content Required Positional Question mark Positional parameters are specified in order, without names. The content that should be layouted into the columns. Column Break Previous page Direction Next page