alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2609.01481
GitHub: https://github.com/Flesymeb/HarnessOfHarness

Harness-of-Harness: Multi-Day Autonomous Software
Development with Continual Improvement
Haoyang Yan
† 
, Min-Le Su
† 
, Hangfan Zhang
† 
, Zhanhao Li
† 
, Chen Zhang, Shao Zhang,
Yang Chen, Lei Bai, Shuyue Hu
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Abstract
This paper studies autonomous software development, in which LLM-based coding agents transform
high-level requirements into complete, functional, and usable software systems without human interven-
tion. We introduce Harness-of-Harness (HoH), a framework that enables coding agents to continually
improve software during autonomous development. HoH operates on existing coding-agent harnesses,
and organizes their executions into iterative planning–coding–testing loops. To sustain improvement
across loops, HoH balances repair with capability growth, scopes development into small and verifiable
increments, separates implementation-time testing from independent evaluation, and constrains verifi-
able outputs rather than prescribing agent workflows. It progressively exposes deliverables, role-specific
tools, and skills, encourages reuse rather than recreation, and maintains versioned project histories.
On GameCraft-Bench, FrontierSWE, and ProgramBench, three harness–model pairs (Codex with GPT-
5.5, OpenCode with DeepSeek-V4-Pro, and Pi with MiniMax-M3), HoH consistently outperforms the
corresponding standalone harnesses, achieving an average relative gain of 52.25% and a maximum
gain of 82.86% after three iterations. In a multi-day deployment with more than 70 iterations, HoH
autonomously develops a first-person-shooter game, featuring a coherent storyline, fully implemented
core mechanics, human-playable experience, polished visuals and integrated audio.
§ GitHub: Flesymeb/HarnessOfHarness  Project Page: HarnessOfHarness
New issues
Closed issues
1 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
0
8
16
24
32
Open issues
Iteration
Trend
Counts
Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 
Day 5 
Day 6
Continued Polish
Remaining Fixes
Playable Build
Failure & Recovery
Narrative Polish
VFX Polish
Enemy Combat AI
CG Animation
Menu & Settings
Footstep Audio
Animation Binding
HUD & UI
Lighting Polish
Minimap & Guidance
Gunfire Audio
Enemy Model
Weapon Handling
Import Map
Inital Greybox
Autonomous Development of an FPS Game via Harness-of-Harness
Figure 1 | Across successive iterations by Harness-of-Harness, the resulting First-Person-Shooter game features
a coherent storyline, implemented combat, weapon and enemy-interaction systems, player guidance, heads-up
display and menu systems, cinematic animation, and polished visual and audio presentation, yielding human-
playable experience. The game, development traces, and gameplay videos are available on GitHub.
†
Equal contribution. {yanhaoyang, suminle, zhanghangfan, lizhanhao, hushuyue}@pjlab.org.cn
1
arXiv:2609.01481v1 [cs.AI] 1 Sep 2026

1 Introduction
Software development has become a prominent application of large language models (LLMs) [4,
37]. As LLM capabilities have advanced, LLM-based coding agents have progressed from localized
assistance, such as function completion [2, 22], to increasingly complex tasks, including navigating
large codebases and resolving repository-level issues [12, 25, 29, 36, 39]. Despite their growing
adoption, most coding agents still largely operate under a human-in-the-loop setting (Figure 2a):
developers must define tasks, guide intermediate decisions, review generated changes and intervene
when failures occur [1]. In this study, we pursue a more ambitious goal: autonomous software
development (Figure 2b); given only high-level requirements as human input, coding agents start from
scratch and independently transform the requirements into complete, functional, and deployable
software systems, without further human guidance or intervention.
Such autonomous development poses a fundamentally longer-horizon problem than conventional
agentic coding tasks [14, 28]. Building a software system from scratch requires agents not only to
generate code snippets, but also to translate high-level requirements into executable plans, coordinate
interdependent tasks, design and integrate components, and continuously test and debug the evolving
system [8, 32, 36]. As these interdependent decisions and modifications accumulate, development
naturally unfolds over increasingly long trajectories [14, 28]. As trajectories grow, agents may lose
track of earlier requirements and design decisions, or introduce local fixes that violate constraints
elsewhere [3, 26]. Failed attempts and suboptimal decisions may accumulate, while new evidence
from testing can invalidate earlier assumptions [5, 24, 33]. Long trajectories can also lead to repetitive
cycles of inspection and repair, redundant verification of completed components, or premature
declaration of completion despite missing or incorrect functionality [3, 11]. Together, these challenges
suggest that autonomous software development is not simply a problem of longer execution; the real
challenge is sustaining coherent and effective progress over time.
Here, we introduce Harness-of-Harness (HoH), a framework that equips coding agents with continual
improvement capabilities for autonomous software development. Modern coding agents operate within
a harness—the surrounding system that provides tools, manages execution and mediates the LLM’s
interaction with the development environment [36, 39, 45]. HoH builds upon existing harnesses and
organizes development into iterative planning–coding–testing loops. At each iteration, the planner
synthesizes the high-level requirements and evidence from previous iterations into a development
plan. Each plan must both address outstanding problems and deliver a small yet concrete new
capability, following the principle of iterative and incremental development [13]. This helps prevent
development from collapsing into repetitive local repairs, while the limited scope makes progress
easier to verify and reduces the risk of uncontrolled changes. The developer then implements the plan
and embeds focused testing throughout implementation, creating immediate feedback around local
changes. After passing these tests, a tester independently evaluates the resulting system against both
the overall requirements and the development plan, using complementary white-box and black-box
tests. The tests are conducted from multiple perspectives, such as functional correctness, completeness,
usability, and visual and audio quality (if any). The resulting structured test report is returned to the
planner as evidence for the next iteration, closing the loop.
Throughout this process, HoH specifies the artifacts and evidence that agents must deliver, but does
not prescribe a rigid workflow for producing them. Each role must return a structured artifact,
and outputs that violate the required schema trigger a retry. This constrains verifiable outcomes
while preserving agent autonomy over reasoning, tool use and implementation strategy. To maintain
continuity without overwhelming the context window, HoH adopts progressive disclosure rather than
a dedicated memory module: plans, reports, histories and other artifacts are persisted in the file system
2

(a) Human-in-the-loop Development
Requirement
Coding Agent
Observe
(b) Autonomous Software Development
Requirement
Project
Planner 
Developer QA Tester
Harness of Harness (HoH)
Reinvoke
Concept Prototype Product
Errors & Bugs Errors & Bugs
Auto Observe & Reinvoke
Concept Prototype Product
Figure 2 | Two different modes of software development. In human-in-the-loop development, coding
agents generate code under continuous human oversight, guidance, review, and intervention. In autonomous
software development, agents independently transform high-level requirements into complete, functional, and
deployable software systems without human guidance or intervention.
and initially exposed through a concise, categorized index, with detailed contents retrieved only when
relevant. Tools, such as MCP servers, expert models and domain-specific algorithms, are organized
by role, with lightweight Markdown-based skills providing concise, on-demand guidance for their
use. Agents are encouraged to draw on existing resources rather than recreate standard capabilities,
reducing redundant effort on routine engineering tasks. Finally, HoH maintains a versioned record of
project evolution at both the agent role and iteration levels. By preserving the software state together
with concise accounts of how it changes, HoH can return to previously verified states after major
regressions and draw on evidence from earlier attempts when similar failures recur to inform the
diagnosis and resolution.
We evaluate HoH in two complementary settings: three controlled benchmarks (GameCraft-
Bench [23], FrontierSWE [6], and ProgramBench [40]), and open-ended game development that
spans over multiple days. First, we evaluate the HoH loop under the original benchmark specifications,
without additional tools, skills or version-control mechanisms. We consider three harness–model con-
figurations: Codex with GPT-5.5 (high), OpenCode with DeepSeek-V4-Pro, and Pi with MiniMax-M3.
Across all three benchmarks, HoH consistently outperforms the corresponding standalone harnesses.
After three iterations, it yields absolute gains of 16.62–22.08 points on GameCraft-Bench, 19–29
points on FrontierSWE, and 6.09–16.85 points on ProgramBench. On FrontierSWE, HoH with Codex
and GPT-5.5 (high) continues improving over ten iterations, from 22% to 72.67%. In our second
setting, HoH autonomously builds a complex game from scratch, given only high-level product
requirements, which exposes challenges that are largely absent from conventional benchmarks.
Different from benchmark evaluation, we additionally implement HoH with role-specific tools and
skills, supporting development engine interaction, asset acquisition and generation, reference retrieval,
testing, and project-state management. Code changes and role-specific artifacts are committed to
a public GitHub repository after each agent stage, making the complete development trajectory
traceable. Over multiple days of autonomous development, HoH transforms the initial requirements
into a complete, human-playable game with a coherent storyline, fully implemented core mechanics,
polished visuals and integrated audio.
3

2 Related Work
Agent Harnesses. An agent harness is the operational layer that determines what information an
LLM receives, what actions it can execute, and how execution results enter subsequent decisions [16,
17]. Many mechanisms now assembled within harnesses were developed as distinct research directions.
Prompting and context engineering shape model-facing state [19, 46]; external memory extends
the state available across interactions [30]; ReAct couples reasoning with environment actions [41];
and GPTSwarm represents multi-agent orchestration as an optimizable graph [50]. More recent
work treats the harness itself as the optimization target: AutoHarness synthesizes a code harness
from environment feedback, Meta-Harness searches over harness code, and Self-Harness iteratively
diagnoses and modifies its own harness [15, 20, 45]. These approaches improve agent behavior by
changing the operational layer. HoH builds on existing agent harnesses and iteratively improves an
evolving software project through repeated implementation, evaluation, and refinement.
Agentic Systems for Software Development. Research has progressed from localized code gen-
eration and self-contained programs [4, 10] to repository-level issue resolution, agent–computer
interfaces, general software-engineering agents, and refactoring [12, 29, 36, 38, 39]. Beyond repos-
itory issue resolution, MetaGPT and ChatDev use predefined role-based workflows for software
generation [8, 32]; AgileCoder and EvoDev organize incremental development around sprints
or dependent features [18, 27]; and EvoMAC adapts the multi-agent workflow using test feed-
back [9]. Recent benchmarks broaden both the development settings and the capabilities under
evaluation [7, 14, 28]. SWE-EVO and SlopCodeBench study long-horizon evolution and degradation,
while Commit0, ProjDevBench, ProgramBench, and GameCraft-Bench evaluate from-scratch con-
struction of complete libraries or projects [21, 23, 40, 49]. FrontierSWE further covers from-scratch
implementation together with open-ended performance and research objectives [6]. Existing coding
harnesses typically organize development within a bounded episode, providing limited support
for preserving project decisions, verified functionality, and evaluation evidence across subsequent
revisions. HoH builds on these harnesses and extends their use to iterative greenfield development by
maintaining continuity across planning, implementation, and evaluation cycles.
3 Harness-of-Harness
Harness-of-Harness (HoH) organizes a fixed coding-agent system into a long-running cycle of planning,
development, and independent testing. Each cycle produces a bounded software increment, verifies
the resulting candidate, and carries both the candidate and its execution evidence into the next cycle.
The design follows iterative and incremental software development: the system grows through small,
testable changes while preserving behavior that has already been validated.
3.1 Problem Formulation and Challenges
Given a software specification S, the end-to-end software development task is to construct a complete
software artifact 𝐴 that satisfies its functional and quality requirements. Let 𝑀 denote a language
model and 𝐻 the coding harness through which it interacts with a software environment. HoH applies
a fixed harness–model configuration to this task:
HoH
𝑀,𝐻 
: S ↦ −→ 𝐴. (1)
This setting presents three challenges. (1) As the artifact evolves over a long development trajectory,
earlier requirements, design decisions, observed failures, and previously validated behavior can be
4

Project Planner
QA Tester
Developer
Development Toolchain & Skills
Callable tools and development skills
for designing, coding, and testing.
Evidence-Grounded Testing
Build a software fromthe plan
,
using skills & tools.
Evaluate the software across
multiple quality dimensions.
Turn thePRD
and
test evidence
into a new development plan
Prior Project State
Testing
Planning
Screenshot
Source code
Evidence Bundle
Build & Test Integrity
Funcional Correctness
Interface & Interacion
Data &Dependencies
Coniguraion
Stability & Completeness
Development Doc
Evidence Bundle
Update
Software Arifact
Development
Development Document
Unresolved Gaps
Veriied Behaviors
Prioriized Task Scope
Task Speciicaion
Software speciicaion
PRD
User Task
Make a platformergame.
Complete Software
Preservaion Constraints
Validaion Requirements
Update
Core tools
Development Skills
Asset Generator
Asset Provider
Git toolGodot MCP
API Docs
CG Generator
Reference Pool
Issue Ledger
Compiler
Browser
ScreenshotSource CodeTraces
White-box Test
Black-box Test
2D/3D Asset Selecion
Domain Knowledge
PRD Generator
Performance Tuning
UI/UX & Style PolishRunime Debugging
Harnesses
Figure 3 | Harness-of-Harness overview. HoH repeatedly invokes a Project Planner, Developer, and QA
Tester around an evolving software artifact. The deterministic Runtime freezes each role’s inputs, enforces its
permissions, binds evidence to the tested candidate, and records the resulting project state. The model, base
harness, role definitions, and runtime policy remain fixed within a run; the development document, software
artifact, and execution evidence evolve across iterations.
forgotten or become disconnected from subsequent changes. (2) A high-level specification often leaves
the next useful change underdetermined. Component dependencies and evolving implementation
constraints mean that locally reasonable changes can conflict with existing behavior, while repeated
inspection and repair may consume iterations without advancing the complete system. (3) Functional
and quality requirements manifest through heterogeneous, scenario-specific behaviors. Missing or
incorrect behavior may therefore remain undetected, allowing an incomplete artifact to be accepted
as complete. To address these challenges, HoH organizes planning, implementation, and independent
verification into a three-agent loop that is repeated across iterations, with the evolving artifact and
accumulated development evidence carried between loops.
3.2 Harness-of-Harness Overview
In end-to-end software development, the next useful change cannot be determined from the speci-
fication alone; it requires jointly interpreting the high-level specification, the current artifact, and
the evidence accumulated during development. The artifact exposes component dependencies, im-
plementation constraints, and missing capabilities. Execution evidence reveals observed failures,
changes the priority of unmet requirements, and identifies validated behavior that subsequent work
should preserve.
HoH organizes this changing decision process around a bounded development loop. Each loop starts
from the current project state and selects one coherent objective that groups the interdependent work
needed for an observable software increment while excluding unrelated changes. It then implements
the increment and evaluates the resulting artifact before further development begins. Evaluation
results inform the next objective by revealing unmet requirements and observed failures, while
identifying validated behavior that subsequent changes should preserve. Repeating this unit allows
repair, extension, and preservation demands to be reprioritized as the artifact evolves, keeping local
5

work aligned with the end-to-end objective.
Producing a validated increment requires three different decisions. The system must first determine
what to change next from the specification and retained project state. The second decision concerns
how to realize that change in the current artifact, where the appropriate implementation depends on
details encountered during development. The final decision is whether the resulting behavior satisfies
observable requirements. These decisions require different context and authority: objective selection
requires a project-level view, implementation requires write access and local technical autonomy, and
acceptance requires an assessment that is independent of the implementation claim. HoH assigns
these responsibilities to a Project Planner, a Developer, and a QA Tester, respectively. Each loop invokes
the same harness–model configuration once in each role, in planning–development–testing order.
3.3 Cross-Loop State Management
Repeated loops support iterative and incremental development only when a later loop inherits more
than the latest implementation. A software artifact records the code, resources, and configuration that
currently exist, but it does not fully record why earlier changes were selected, which observed failures
remain unresolved, or which behavior has already been validated. Since each harness invocation has
bounded context, information retained only in its interaction history disappears when the invocation
ends. A later loop that receives only the code must reconstruct the development state from the
implementation. This reconstruction can overlook unmet requirements, repeat work whose outcome
is already known, forget unresolved failures, or regress validated behavior.
HoH therefore maintains two complementary states across loop boundaries. The artifact state carries
the current implementation from one loop to the next. The evidence state carries the validated
knowledge needed to decide how that implementation should change. Together, they preserve both
the object under development and the information accumulated by developing and evaluating it.
Let 𝐴
𝑡 
denote the software artifact state after loop 𝑡, including its source code, configuration, resources,
and project metadata. It records what the software currently is and provides the concrete starting
point for the next increment. Let E
𝑡 
denote the execution evidence state obtained by evaluating 𝐴
𝑡
against the specification and the current development objective. It records which behaviors have
been verified, which claims remain unsupported, and which observed failures require further work.
Neither state subsumes the other: 𝐴
𝑡 
supplies the implementation on which development operates,
whereas E
𝑡 
supplies the validated project knowledge used to direct that development.
Let 𝐴
0 
denote the empty project workspace before the first loop. With E
0 
= ∅, the transition across
loop 𝑡 can be summarized as
( 
𝐴
𝑡−1
, E
𝑡−1
) 
loop 𝑡 under S
−−−−−−−−−−→ (
 
𝐴
𝑡
, E
𝑡
) 
. (2)
The two states enter a loop in different ways. The Project Planner combines the fixed specification S
with E
𝑡−1 
to determine the next bounded increment. It also reads 𝐴
𝑡−1 
as implementation context so
that the selected work is grounded in the current project. The Developer then starts from 𝐴
𝑡−1 
and
realizes the increment, producing 𝐴
𝑡
. The QA Tester evaluates this updated artifact and produces E
𝑡
for the next planning decision.
At the loop boundary, ( 𝐴
𝑡
, E
𝑡
) becomes the starting state of loop 𝑡 + 1. Carrying 𝐴
𝑡 
forward allows
implementation work to accumulate instead of being reconstructed in every loop. Interpreting E
𝑡
under S allows new observations to revise development priorities, unresolved gaps to remain visible,
and validated behavior to become a preservation requirement. The next objective can therefore
6

build on prior progress without reconstructing the project trajectory from the artifact alone. Artifact
continuity makes development incremental, and evidence-guided objective selection makes it iterative.
3.4 Implementation of a HoH Loop
A HoH loop converts retained project state into a coherent software increment whose behavior is
independently assessed. This transformation begins with objective selection. The global specification
and prior evidence may identify many interdependent demands, so the loop needs a project-level
decision about which bounded, locally complete subset should be addressed next. Establishing this
scope before artifact modification gives the increment observable completion conditions and separates
it from unrelated work.
Realizing the selected objective is a different function. The current artifact exposes implementation-
specific choices that cannot be fully determined during planning, so artifact modification requires
write authority and autonomy over local technical decisions. Assessing the result introduces a third
function. The implementing agent has direct knowledge of its changes, but its completion claim
cannot establish that the intended behavior is present. Acceptance must instead be determined from
observations of a fixed candidate by a role that did not produce that candidate.
These functions differ in the information they require, the authority they exercise, and the deliverable
they produce. HoH therefore assigns objective selection to a Project Planner, artifact modification
to a Developer, and independent acceptance to a QA Tester. The separation makes the target
of an increment explicit, preserves implementation autonomy within that target, and prevents
implementation and acceptance from collapsing into the same decision.
HoH instantiates the three roles as separate invocations of the same fixed harness–model configuration.
For each invocation, a role-specific prompt specifies the role’s responsibility, while a deterministic
Runtime contract enforces its execution authority. The prompt combines fixed role instructions with
loop-specific context to state the role’s objective and required structured output, without prescribing
its reasoning process or tool sequence.
The Runtime controls which inputs an invocation can access, which tools and write operations it may
use, and which output schema it must satisfy. HoH thus constrains what each role may read, change,
and deliver while leaving the agent free to determine how to complete its assigned work within those
boundaries.
3.4.1 Project Planning
The global specification may describe capabilities whose implementation spans interdependent
components, while the retained project state adds observed failures, unmet requirements, and
behaviors that must be preserved. These demands describe what remains relevant to the project, but
they do not by themselves define a tractable unit of work for one loop. Selecting an isolated task can
omit dependencies needed for observable behavior, whereas combining too many unrelated demands
enlarges the change surface. When the resulting candidate fails, the source of the failure becomes
harder to localize, and the affected behavior becomes harder to verify.
The Project Planner converts these competing demands into one bounded objective. It reconciles
S with E
𝑡−1 
to determine what should be addressed next and what previously validated behavior
must be preserved. It reads 𝐴
𝑡−1 
as implementation context so that the objective reflects the current
project structure, but it cannot modify the artifact. The result is a development document 𝐷
𝑡 
that
defines the scope and validation conditions of the current increment.
7

The objective is bounded but locally complete. Boundedness limits the amount of unrelated behavior
changed in one loop, which keeps implementation and diagnosis tractable. Local completeness
ensures that the selected capability includes the related changes required to make it functional and
testable. The scope of an increment is therefore determined by a coherent observable behavior, not
simply by the number of files or components it touches.
Accordingly, 𝐷
𝑡 
contains a small set of related tasks, the functionality that must be preserved, and
observable requirements for validating the increment. Related changes may span several files or
components when they are jointly required by the objective. Unrelated refactoring and opportunistic
feature expansion remain outside the loop. The document specifies expected behavior and validation
conditions, while leaving the Developer to choose its reasoning process, tools, and implementation
algorithm.
3.4.2 Artifact Development
A development document defines the intended behavior of an increment, but it cannot anticipate
every implementation decision exposed by the evolving artifact. The Developer must interpret 𝐷
𝑡
in the context of the existing project and adapt its implementation as it encounters code structure,
dependencies, and runtime behavior. HoH therefore constrains the Developer by the required outcome
and artifact boundary instead of prescribing its internal procedure. Within these constraints, the
Developer remains free to select the concrete design, tools, and debugging strategy appropriate to
the current artifact.
Artifact development follows a single-writer boundary: only the Developer may modify the evolving
artifact. The Developer warm-starts from 𝐴
𝑡−1 
so that each increment extends the current implemen-
tation and retains the surrounding project structure. The Planner may inspect 𝐴
𝑡−1 
to ground the
objective, and the QA Tester may inspect and execute the resulting candidate, but neither may alter
the artifact. This boundary makes responsibility for the transition from 𝐴
𝑡−1 
to 𝐴
𝑡 
explicit and keeps
the candidate lineage unambiguous. Once the authorized modifications are complete, the updated
project becomes 𝐴
𝑡
.
Testing is also integrated into artifact development so that failures are exposed close to the changes
that cause them. Before editing, the Developer establishes a baseline for the target behavior. After
each meaningful change, it reruns the corresponding path and inspects the affected implementation,
execution results, and adjacent regression surface. This baseline–change–retest cycle follows the
software-engineering principle commonly known as shift-left testing. Shortening the distance between
a change and its test makes local diagnosis and correction more tractable.
Developer testing and independent acceptance answer different questions. The Developer uses
self-tests to determine whether the implementation is ready to be presented as a candidate and
to repair failures encountered during its own work. These tests do not establish that the product
requirements have been satisfied. Developer observations and completion claims therefore remain
inputs to subsequent verification; acceptance is reserved for the independent QA stage.
3.4.3 Independent Quality Assurance
Independent QA determines whether the candidate exhibits the behavior required by the current
objective while preserving relevant existing functionality. End-to-end software quality is multidimen-
sional and cannot generally be reduced to one fixed performance metric. The relevant functional
behavior, interaction flows, configuration, resources, and regression risks depend on both the global
8

Algorithm 1 Harness-of-Harness
Input: specification S, initial artifact 𝐴
0
, iteration budget 𝑇
Fixed: model 𝑀, harness 𝐻, and role contracts
Output: final artifact 𝐴
𝑇
1: E
0 
← ∅
2: for 𝑡 = 1, . . . , 𝑇 do
3: 𝐷
𝑡 
← ProjectPlanner(S, E
𝑡−1
; read_only( 𝐴
𝑡−1
))
4: 𝐴
𝑡 
← Developer( 𝐴
𝑡−1
; S, 𝐷
𝑡
)
5: E
𝑡 
← QATester(read_only( 𝐴
𝑡
); S, 𝐷
𝑡
, Runtime. check( 𝐴
𝑡
))
6: end for
7: return 𝐴
𝑇
specification and the selected increment. HoH therefore derives scenario-specific, checkable evaluation
criteria from S and 𝐷
𝑡 
rather than applying the same generic test to every candidate.
The QA Tester receives 𝐴
𝑡 
as a frozen, read-only candidate together with the results of deterministic
build and execution checks. Freezing separates artifact production from artifact assessment: the
implementation cannot change while its evidence is being collected. It also gives every observation
a single candidate identity, so that an assessment cannot combine behavior from different artifact
versions. Read-only access prevents the QA stage from silently repairing the candidate it is meant to
evaluate.
For each criterion, the QA Tester selects observations appropriate to the software scenario. Black-box
tests exercise the candidate through ordinary inputs and rendered outputs to examine user-observable
behavior, state transitions, and end-to-end flows. These observations establish whether the required
behavior is visible at the product boundary. White-box tests inspect the source, configuration, resource
bindings, runtime state, and logs. They help diagnose failures and corroborate observations whose
internal conditions cannot be determined from outputs alone.
The two forms of testing provide complementary views of the same frozen candidate. A criterion is
verified only when candidate-bound records support the required behavior. Observed failures, unmet
requirements, regressions, and insufficient evidence are recorded as gaps instead of being inferred as
successful completion. The resulting assessments and supporting execution records form the evidence
state E
𝑡 
passed to the next loop. This separation ensures that acceptance follows observable evidence
rather than the Developer’s knowledge of its implementation or its completion claim.
The complete HoH procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1, which combines the cross-loop state
transition with project planning, artifact development, independent quality assurance, and Runtime
validation.
4 Experiments: Benchmark Evaluation
We evaluate HoH on three software-development benchmarks and three harness–model configurations,
comparing final artifact quality with the corresponding Vanilla baselines.
4.1 Experimental Setup
Benchmarks. We evaluate HoH on three benchmarks: GameCraft-Bench [23], FrontierSWE [6], and
ProgramBench [40]. GameCraft-Bench comprises 140 tasks across 15 game families, each requiring
9

an agent to construct a complete, playable Godot project from a natural-language specification. We
sample 45 tasks using stratified random sampling by game family, selecting three tasks from each
of the 15 families with a fixed random seed. For coarse-grained analysis, we additionally organize
the 15 families into five broader groups defined in this work: Action, Timing, Strategy, Simulation,
and Adventure. The complete sampled task list and our family-to-group mapping are provided in
the supplementary material. Due to computational resource constraints, we select 15 tasks from
FrontierSWE’s 17 tasks for evaluation, comprising 4 Implementation (Impl.), 9 Performance (Perf.),
and 2 Research tasks. ProgramBench is a cleanroom program-reconstruction benchmark in which
agents receive only a compiled executable and documentation and must rebuild a codebase whose
behavior matches the reference program. More details are provided in the supplementary material.
Harnesses and Models. We evaluate HoH with three harness–model configurations: Codex CLI
1
with GPT-5.5 at high reasoning effort, OpenCode
2 
with DeepSeek-V4-Pro, and Pi Coding Agent
3 
with
MiniMax-M3.
Baseline and Evaluation Protocol. We compare HoH against Vanilla, the corresponding harness–
model configuration without the HoH protocol. Vanilla performs one standard development pass,
whereas HoH@𝑇 performs 𝑇 planning–coding–testing iterations, with the software artifact and
execution evidence carried across iterations; the main experiments use 𝑇 = 3. Intermediate and final
HoH artifacts are evaluated only after the complete run, and evaluator outputs are not returned to
the development loop. For each task, Vanilla and HoH use identical benchmark-provided initial states
and the same underlying harness–model configuration, differing only in the application of the HoH
protocol.
Metrics. For GameCraft-Bench, we report the benchmark’s Overall score. Under this metric, game
artifacts that fail to compile or run receive a score of zero, while runnable artifacts are scored by
combining Core Mechanics, Content Depth, Functional Visuals, and Art and Presentation using the
benchmark-defined weights. We average task-level scores over the 45 tasks and use the benchmark’s
0–100 scale. For FrontierSWE, task-specific verifiers assign official rewards, and we report the mean
reward over the 15 evaluated tasks. We additionally report the official dominance score, defined
as the average task-level win rate against a randomly selected competing configuration from the
12 evaluated harness–condition combinations. For ProgramBench, we report Avg. Test Pass Rate,
computed as the mean across tasks of the fraction of hidden behavioral tests passed for each task. We
use this continuous signal for relative comparisons between Vanilla and HoH and abbreviate it as Pass
Rate
† 
in Table 1. As a proxy for model-interaction volume, we report provider-reported cumulative
input and output tokens from coding-harness model calls, excluding benchmark evaluation. Input
totals may include cached context reads; because cache accounting differs across providers, we use
these values for within-configuration comparisons rather than direct cross-provider cost comparisons.
4.2 Main Results
HoH improves software artifact quality across three benchmarks spanning game development,
repository-level software engineering, and program reconstruction. Table 1 reports Vanilla and
all three HoH iterations for each harness–model configuration. HoH@3 outperforms Vanilla across
the three benchmarks under all three configurations. On GameCraft-Bench, mean Overall scores
1
https://github.com/openai/codex; version 0.142.5.
2
https://github.com/anomalyco/opencode; version 1.14.30.
3
https://github.com/earendil-works/pi; version 0.80.10.
10

Setting 
GameCraft-Bench FrontierSWE ProgramBench
Action Timing Strat. Sim. Adv. Overall Impl. Perf. Research Dominance Pass Rate
†
Codex + GPT-5.5 (high)
Vanilla 48.74 48.80 44.06 53.63 52.68 49.58 0.21 0.17 1.15 44% 60.41
HoH@1 59.73 53.79 57.01 66.75 61.24 59.71 0.24 0.44 1.30 58% 65.42
HoH@2 64.34 62.03 59.97 71.77 66.11 64.84 0.28 0.45 1.18 60% 65.79
HoH@3 71.02 70.26 66.13 78.42 71.76 71.52 (+21.93) 0.30 0.45 1.45 71% (+27) 66.50 (+6.09)
OpenCode + DeepSeek-V4-Pro
Vanilla 26.21 24.05 21.27 37.12 25.84 26.90 0.08 0.23 0.57 25% 45.27
HoH@1 27.75 27.40 21.73 43.75 22.44 28.61 0.09 0.23 0.78 28% 55.33
HoH@2 43.22 36.56 33.51 52.26 36.05 40.32 0.10 0.27 0.78 42% 55.66
HoH@3 49.00 45.05 43.34 55.86 51.64 48.98 (+22.08) 0.15 0.27 0.78 44% (+19) 57.56 (+12.29)
Pi + MiniMax-M3
Vanilla 45.64 38.20 34.53 48.19 44.26 42.16 0.06 0.12 1.30 35% 35.83
HoH@1 50.59 52.23 38.60 54.00 49.89 49.06 0.10 0.42 1.89 62% 48.68
HoH@2 54.70 56.52 42.33 63.20 58.47 55.04 0.11 0.43 1.89 66% 53.57
HoH@3 58.24 62.10 44.86 64.25 64.44 58.78 (+16.62) 0.11 0.45 1.88 64% (+29) 52.68 (+16.85)
Table 1 | Main results on GameCraft-Bench, FrontierSWE, and ProgramBench. Each harness is evaluated
under Vanilla and HoH@1–3. Within each harness and metric, bold values mark the best setting; rankings use
unrounded values, and exact ties share the same formatting. Small green values shown only for HoH@3 give
absolute gains over Vanilla; Dominance gains are percentage points. Bold italic labels distinguish aggregate
metrics from task categories. Strat., Sim., Adv., Impl., and Perf. denote Strategy, Simulation, Adventure,
Implementation, and Performance, respectively. FrontierSWE reports category scores and Dominance. For
ProgramBench, Pass Rate
† 
denotes the benchmark’s Avg. Test Pass Rate.
increase from 49.58 to 71.52 for Codex, from 26.90 to 48.98 for OpenCode, and from 42.16 to 58.78
for Pi. On FrontierSWE, rewards increase from 0.31 to 0.54, from 0.23 to 0.31, and from 0.26 to
0.55, respectively. On ProgramBench, Avg. Test Pass Rate increases from 60.41 to 66.50 for Codex,
from 45.27 to 57.56 for OpenCode, and from 35.83 to 52.68 for Pi. HoH@3 also outperforms Vanilla
in every reported task category across the three benchmarks under all three configurations.
HoH yields consistent gains over Vanilla across all three harness–model pairs. The gains are
not limited to configurations with a particular level of Vanilla performance. Codex with GPT-5.5
(high), the strongest Vanilla configuration, reaches the highest final GameCraft-Bench score of 71.52
after improving by 21.93 points. Pi with MiniMax-M3 records the largest gain on FrontierSWE,
increasing by 0.29 from 0.26 to 0.55, and the largest ProgramBench gain, increasing the average test
pass rate by 16.85 points. OpenCode with DeepSeek-V4-Pro starts from the lowest Vanilla score on
GameCraft-Bench and FrontierSWE, yet HoH@3 raises its scores to 48.98 and 0.31, respectively, while
increasing its ProgramBench average test pass rate from 45.27 to 57.56. OpenCode with HoH@3
further exceeds Codex Vanilla in Action and Simulation on GameCraft-Bench and in Performance
on FrontierSWE. Thus, HoH improves configurations that begin at substantially different levels of
Vanilla performance.
HoH continues to improve software artifact quality as development loops progress. Table 1 traces
the gains accumulated over the first three development loops. On GameCraft-Bench, Overall scores
increase monotonically from HoH@1 to HoH@3 under all three harness–model pairs. This trend is
particularly pronounced for OpenCode, whose gain over Vanilla grows from 1.71 points at HoH@1 to
11

13.42 at HoH@2 and 22.08 at HoH@3. On FrontierSWE, the cross-configuration Dominance of Codex
increases from 44% under Vanilla to 58%, 60%, and 71% at HoH@1–3, respectively. ProgramBench
exhibits a similar overall pattern: Codex and OpenCode attain their highest Pass Rates at HoH@3,
while Pi peaks at HoH@2.
4.3 Analysis and Ablation Study
On GameCraft-Bench, HoH improves software quality across mechanics, content, visuals, and
presentation. Figure 4 reports the four benchmark-defined GameCraft-Bench quality components
separately. HoH@3 improves all four components under every harness–model configuration, with
gains of 20.00–25.56 points for Codex, 19.25–34.63 points for OpenCode, and 11.32–25.38 points
for Pi. For Codex, Functional Visuals shows the largest increase, from 48.67 to 74.23, while Art
and Presentation rises from 45.28 to 65.28. The improvements therefore span gameplay mechanics,
content richness, visual clarity, and presentation quality.
Mechanics Content Functional Art
0
25
50
75
100
Mean Score
(a) Codex + GPT-5.5 (high)
64.00
48.06 
48.67 
45.28
86.21
70.26 
74.23
65.28
Mechanics Content Functional Art
(b) OpenCode + DeepSeek-V4-Pro
34.71
28.62 
24.85 
22.71
69.34
49.27 
44.17 
41.96
Mechanics Content Functional Art
(c) Pi + MiniMax-M3
49.41
39.12 
39.86 
43.05
74.79
57.29 
56.38 
54.37
Vanilla HoH
Figure 4 | Vanilla and HoH@3 scores across the four GameCraft-Bench rubric categories. Panels (a)–(c)
show results for Codex with GPT-5.5 (high), OpenCode with DeepSeek-V4-Pro, and Pi with MiniMax-M3,
respectively. Bars report mean category scores over 45 tasks for Core Mechanics, Content Depth, Functional
Visuals, and Art and Presentation; error bars indicate 95% bootstrap confidence intervals.
1 5 10
Iteration
20
40
60
80
Dominance (%)
Vanilla = 27.33
Vanilla HoH
Figure 5 | FrontierSWE Dominance over 10
loops. Shading shows ±1 SE; the star marks the
best checkpoint and the dashed line denotes
Vanilla baseline.
On FrontierSWE, HoH sustains quality gains over ten
loops. To examine whether these gains extend beyond
three loops, we continue running Codex with GPT-5.5
(high) through HoH@10 on the same 15 FrontierSWE
tasks and report Dominance over a fixed 11-checkpoint
comparison pool comprising Vanilla and HoH@1–10.
As shown in Figure 5, Dominance increases from 39.33%
at HoH@3 to 72.67% at HoH@10 and reaches 76.00%
at HoH@9, whereas Vanilla obtains 27.33%. HoH@10
therefore improves upon HoH@3 by a further 33.34 per-
centage points and exceeds Vanilla by 45.34 points.
For the same number of development passes, HoH consistently outperforms the Vanilla baseline.
To distinguish the contribution of HoH from the effect of running the coding agent for more passes, we
compare it with Vanilla Continuation using Codex with GPT-5.5 (high). Vanilla uses the official harness
configuration with the same model and inference settings as HoH. After each pass, Vanilla Continuation
submits an additional iteration prompt to continue the same session for another development pass.
Table 2 reports the resulting pass-controlled comparison.
12

(a) Momentum Lab (b) Kitchen Rush (c) Ant Empire
Vanilla
1
2 
1
2 
1
2
1 Visuals: flat geometric platforms ×
2 Mechanics: overlapping modifier zones ×
1 Assets: schematic chopping tile ×
2 Workflow: single plating area ×
1 Content: all special castes at ×0 ×
2 Dynamics: single flood countdown ×
HoH@3
1
2 
1
2
1
2
1 Visuals: themed terrain and goal ✓
2 Mechanics: guided wall-jump route ✓
1 Assets: illustrated chopping station ✓
2 Workflow: plating, pickup, and trash ✓
1 Content: special castes active ✓
2 Dynamics: season and outcome state ✓
Figure 6 | Qualitative comparison of final game artifacts produced by Vanilla and HoH@3 using Codex
with GPT-5.5 (high). Columns show three GameCraft-Bench tasks from distinct game families: Momentum
Lab (momentum-based platformer), Kitchen Rush (restaurant-management simulation), and Ant Empire (idle
colony-management game). Rows show gameplay frames from Vanilla (top) and HoH@3 (bottom). Numbered
dashed boxes identify the regions discussed in the annotations; red crosses and green checks denote limitations
and implemented functionality, respectively.
Method Dev. Passes Score Tokens (M)
Vanilla 1 49.58 2.59
Vanilla Continuation 2 54.99 4.56
Vanilla Continuation 3 58.24 6.33
HoH 1 59.71 2.88
HoH 2 64.84 5.67
HoH 3 71.52 8.41
Table 2 | Comparison of HoH and repeated Vanilla
development after 1, 2, and 3 development passes
on GameCraft-Bench. Results use Codex with GPT-
5.5 (high). Score denotes the mean GameCraft-Bench
Overall score over 45 tasks, and tokens are mean
cumulative coding-harness tokens per task.
At matched budgets of one, two, and three de-
velopment passes, HoH achieves scores of 59.71,
64.84, and 71.52, compared with 49.58, 54.99,
and 58.24 for Vanilla, corresponding to gains
of 10.13, 9.85, and 13.28 points. The advan-
tage is not explained by greater token use alone:
HoH@2 achieves 64.84 with 5.67M tokens, ex-
ceeding the 58.24 obtained by three-pass Vanilla
Continuation with 6.33M tokens. HoH therefore
produces higher-quality artifacts than repeated
Vanilla development under the same pass budget
and a comparable inference budget. Further de-
tails of the pass-controlled experimental design
and complete results are provided in the supplementary material.
Qualitative Analysis. On GameCraft-Bench, HoH produces more complete and refined game arti-
facts, with richer gameplay mechanics, clearer visual presentation, and deeper progression. Figure 6
compares gameplay frames from Vanilla and HoH@3 for three tasks from distinct game families.
In Momentum Lab, themed terrain and visual cues make the objective and wall-jump route explicit.
In Kitchen Rush, distinct pickup, preparation, plating, and disposal stations form a complete and
legible restaurant workflow. In Ant Empire, specialist caste counts, seasonal state, and outcome state
expose longer-term colony progression. The corresponding Overall scores increase from 34.05 to
70.61, from 42.63 to 73.38, and from 65.52 to 87.88, respectively.
13

Variant Score Tokens (M)
w/o Plan Update 63.39 (−8.13) 7.56
w/o Evidence Feedback 65.23 (−6.28) 7.46
w/o Warm-Start 63.67 (−7.85) 11.12
Full HoH@3 71.52 8.41
Table 3 | GameCraft-Bench ablation study with
Codex and GPT-5.5 (high). Parentheses show score
differences from Full HoH@3; tokens are mean cu-
mulative totals per task.
Ablation Study. To assess the role of HoH’s
cross-iteration mechanisms, we evaluate three
variants on all 45 GameCraft-Bench tasks using
Codex with GPT-5.5 (high), with 𝑇 = 3 for each
variant. w/o Plan Update freezes the first de-
velopment document for subsequent iterations
(𝐷
𝑡 
= 𝐷
1 
for 𝑡 ≥ 2), whereas w/o Evidence Feed-
back replans without the preceding execution
evidence. Both retain artifact warm-start. w/o
Warm-Start retains evidence-conditioned plan-
ning but rebuilds the artifact from the empty initial workspace 𝐴
0 
in every iteration.
As shown in Table 3, all three variants underperform Full HoH@3 on every task. Removing plan
updates, excluding execution evidence from replanning, and removing warm-start lowers the score by
8.13, 6.28, and 7.85 points, respectively. Without warm-start, token usage also increases from 8.41M
to 11.12M per task because of repeated reconstruction. These results show that later HoH iterations
benefit from both revising the development document with execution evidence and continuing from
the preceding implementation. Detailed ablation protocols and complete per-task results are provided
in the supplementary material.
5 Experiments: Multi-Day Autonomous FPS Game Development
Benchmark evaluations measure artifact quality after a small number of development loops. A multi-
day case study examines a complementary property: whether a fixed harness–model configuration can
maintain coherent project evolution as implementation constraints, validated behavior, and observed
failures accumulate over many loops. We study this property through Fusepoint, a single-player
narrative first-person shooter developed from an empty workspace containing only a user-provided
product requirements document (PRD). The case analyzes whether HoH can sustain incremental
progress over 70 loops as implementation constraints, validated behavior, and observed failures
accumulate.
5.1 Case Design and Autonomy Boundary
Task and Autonomy Boundary. Fusepoint provides a demanding end-to-end development case. The
product contract specifies a five-minute, single-player bomb-defusal mission. It requires the ordered
capture of two control points, a three-stage defusal at the final objective, a fixed roster of 18 enemies
distributed as 3, 5, and 10 across the three encounter regions, and distinct success and detonation
branches. Satisfying these requirements depends on integrating a 3D environment and external
assets with mission logic, combat mechanics, narrative progression, interface feedback, and runtime
reliability. Progress therefore requires both the construction of new capabilities and the continued
operation of behavior introduced in earlier loops.
Development began in an empty workspace containing the PRD. The PRD specified the intended
gameplay and player-observable acceptance criteria, while leaving the engineering decomposition,
implementation order, and validation plan open. HoH was responsible for translating this product
contract into an executable Godot project and for selecting, implementing, and evaluating the
increments used to construct it.
We ran HoH with Codex CLI and GPT-5.6-Sol at high reasoning effort. At the analysis cutoff, the
system had completed 70 development loops. Human involvement was limited to restoring network
14

or API availability and did not extend to planning, implementation, debugging, testing, or acceptance.
Domain-Specific Skills and Tools. Interactive game development requires more than source-
code editing: the agents must manipulate engine state, produce compatible media assets, maintain
a coherent interface, and test behavior through the running game. We therefore equipped HoH
with domain-specific tools and reusable skills. Godot 4.7
4 
served as the development and runtime
environment, while Godot MCP provided engine-level development, execution, and debugging
capabilities. An asset-generation skill specified the target visual style, dimensions, and file formats for
image, 3D, and video assets retrieved or generated by the corresponding tools. A UI/UX presentation
skill supplied guidance on visual appearance and style consistency. A testing skill recorded scenario-
specific testing considerations and guided debugging and validation through Godot MCP. All external
assets incorporated during development were obtained under licenses permitting reuse, including
CC0 and CC BY, with their source and required attribution preserved.
Verification Scope. Benchmark configurations evaluate through bounded task-provided checks,
including screenshots and smoke tests. For this case, the Tester additionally examined live keyboard
input and the resulting game responses, audio behavior, and the integration of 3D assets.
Project State and Traceability. We used GitHub for version control and issue tracking, retaining the
commit and issue histories of the evolving project. At each loop, the working state was materialized in
a development document, the versioned software workspace, and testing records comprising an issue
table and evidence-packet files. These records allowed the three roles to modify, execute, and inspect
the same project while retaining the artifact and observed test outcomes across loops. The GitHub
repository linked on the title page provides the released project materials and selected development
records for inspection of the process.
5.2 Development Dynamics Across Loops
Figure 1 summarizes how Fusepoint evolved through 70 HoH loops. To characterize the development
dynamics underlying this trajectory, we tracked newly recorded issues, QA-verified closures, reopened
issues, and the unresolved issue count using the GitHub issue and commit histories together with
the evidence packets produced during testing. These records reflect whether capability growth was
accompanied by accumulating gaps and whether later loops returned to failures exposed during
earlier development.
The observed trajectory through 70 loops contains three broad phases, distinguished by the relative
prevalence of capability addition, issue discovery, and issue resolution. During initial construction
(Loops 1–27), HoH established the executable project and its core interaction paths. Adding these
initial capabilities also exposed missing requirements and defects, so the active issue backlog increased
as the artifact became more testable.
Capability expansion (Loops 28–49) then combined new functionality with continued diagnosis and
repair. Later loops operated on an increasingly integrated artifact, where a local change could affect
mission state, combat, interface feedback, or runtime behavior established previously. As the planned
capabilities approached completion, feature additions slowed and issue resolution became more
prevalent, producing a stabilization phase in which the active backlog began to decline.
Issue resolution remained non-monotonic throughout this process. By Loop 70, 65 of the 81 recorded
issues had been closed, leaving 16 unresolved. Seventeen issues were reopened after an earlier
4
Godot Engine 4.7: https://godotengine.org/releases/4.7/
15

closure when a subsequent change caused previously verified behavior to fail again. A reopened
record identifies both the failed behavior and its earlier verification history, making regression repair
available as explicit project work to subsequent planning instead of requiring that history to be
reconstructed from the latest artifact.
The trajectory consequently reflects the two forms of continuity required by iterative development.
The versioned workspace allowed implementation work to accumulate, while its GitHub commit
history made individual changes traceable. The issue history and evidence packets kept unfinished
work, verified behavior, and regressions available for later planning. Development could therefore
alternate among capability growth, repair, and preservation as the state of the project changed.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
We introduced Harness-of-Harness (HoH), which extends existing coding-agent harnesses to support
software development from scratch without modifying their implementations. HoH organizes a fixed
harness–model configuration into a continuous planning–coding–testing cycle, carrying evolving
artifacts and execution evidence across iterations. On the benchmark tasks, HoH improves final artifact
quality for all three evaluated configurations and continues to benefit from additional iterations. In the
multi-day Fusepoint case, HoH developed a game project over 70 loops, with the versioned workspace,
issue history, and evidence packets recording the development trajectory. Just as a coding harness
structures model operation, HoH structures harness participation in long-horizon development. More
broadly, HoH offers a practical path toward end-to-end software development through persistent,
evidence-grounded orchestration of coding-agent harnesses. Future work will extend HoH to a
broader range of real-world development scenarios, including different types of games and other
software systems [35, 42, 43, 44, 47, 48], toward a general framework for autonomous software
development.
References
[1] Anthropic. Claude Code for Product Development. Anthropic technical report, 2025.
 https://www-cdn.
anthropic.com/58284b19e702b49db9302d5b6f135ad8871e7658.pdf.
[2] Shraddha Barke, Michael B. James, and Nadia Polikarpova. Grounded copilot: How programmers interact
with code-generating models. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 7(OOPSLA1):85–111,
2023. doi: 10.1145/3586030. https://doi.org/10.1145/3586030.
[3] Mert Cemri, Melissa Z. Pan, Shuyi Yang, Lakshya A. Agrawal, Bhavya Chopra, Rishabh Tiwari, Kurt
Keutzer, Aditya Parameswaran, Dan Klein, Kannan Ramchandran, Matei A. Zaharia, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
and Ion Stoica. Why do multi-agent LLM systems fail? In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 38. Curran Associates, Inc., 2025. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
paper/2025/file/b1041e52d3be19f0a9bc491657488e4a-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.pdf.
[4] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan,
Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger,
Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder,
Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet,
Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-
Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir
Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam,
Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie
Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech
16

Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code. CoRR, abs/2107.03374, 2021. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.
[5] Mengzhuo Chen, Junjie Wang, Zhe Liu, Yawen Wang, Haiming Zheng, and Qing Wang. From failed
trajectories to reliable LLM agents: Diagnosing and repairing harness flaws, 2026. https://arxiv.org/
abs/2606.06324.
[6] Evan Chu, Rajan Agarwal, Abishek Thangamuthu, Brendan Graham, Justus Mattern, Freeman Jiang, Paul
Cento, Swarnim Jain, Mersad Abbasi, Mohammad Hossein Rezaei, George Wang, Alex Zhang, Simon Guo,
Karina Nguyen, Danna Liu, Arash Bidgoli, Aditya Dalmia, Apoorv Dankar, Ashrut Vaddela, Calvin Chen,
Keshav Kumar, Kushagra Vaish, Navid Pour, Rishyanth Kondra, Sagar Badiyani, Sidharth Giri, Snagnik
Das, Soham Gaikwad, Syed Shah, Vagish Dilawari, and Vishal Agarwal. Frontierswe. Proximal Blog, 2026.
https://frontierswe.com/blog.
[7] Lingyue Fu, Xin Ding, Yaoming Zhu, Shao Zhang, Lin Qiu, Weiwen Liu, Weinan Zhang, Xuezhi Cao,
Xunliang Cai, Jiaxin Ding, et al. Catarena: Evaluation of llm agents through iterative tournament
competitions. Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on Machine Learning(ICML2026), 2026.
[8] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang,
Zili Wang, Steven Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen
Schmidhuber. MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, pages 23247–23275, 2024. https://proceedings.iclr.cc/
paper_files/paper/2024/file/6507b115562bb0a305f1958ccc87355a-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[9] Yue Hu, Yuzhu Cai, Yaxin Du, Xinyu Zhu, Xiangrui Liu, Zijie Yu, Yuchen Hou, Shuo Tang, and Siheng
Chen. Self-evolving multi-agent collaboration networks for software development. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, pages 23007–23039, 2025. https://proceedings.iclr.cc/
paper_files/paper/2025/file/39af4f2f9399122a14ccf95e2d2e7122-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[10] Dong Huang, Jie M. Zhang, Michael Luck, Qingwen Bu, Yuhao Qing, and Heming Cui. AgentCoder:
Multi-agent-based code generation with iterative testing and optimisation, 2023. https://arxiv.org/
abs/2312.13010.
[11] Jek Huang, Jeffery Hsia, Jiayi Sun, Freddie Shi, Wei Huang, and Ian H. White. Proof-or-stop: Don’t
trust the agent, trust the evidence—loop engineering for verifiable evidence-gated lifecycle control, 2026.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.14890.
[12] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
Narasimhan. SWE-Bench: Can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues? In International
Conference on Learning Representations, pages 54107–54157, 2024. https://proceedings.iclr.cc/
paper_files/paper/2024/file/edac78c3e300629acfe6cbe9ca88fb84-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[13] Craig Larman and Victor R Basili. Iterative and incremental developments. a brief history. Computer, 36
(6):47–56, 2003.
[14] Tue Le, Minh V. T. Thai, Dung Nguyen Manh, Huy Phan Nhat, and Nghi D. Q. Bui. SWE-EVO: Bench-
marking Coding Agents in Long-Horizon Software Evolution Scenarios, 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2512.18470.
[15] Yoonho Lee, Roshen Nair, Qizheng Zhang, Kangwook Lee, Omar Khattab, and Chelsea Finn. Meta-Harness:
End-to-end optimization of model harnesses, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.28052.
[16] Junjie Li, Xi Xiao, Yunbei Zhang, Chen Liu, Lin Zhao, Xiaoying Liao, Yingrui Ji, Janet Wang, Yingqiang Ge,
Weijie Xu, Xi Fang, Xiang Xu, Tianchen Zhao, Youngeun Kim, Jihun Hamm, Tianyang Wang, and Chandan
Reddy. Agent harness engineering: A survey, 2026. https://openreview.net/pdf?id=eONq7FdiHa.
[17] Jiacheng Liu, Xiaohan Zhao, Xinyi Shang, and Zhiqiang Shen. Dive into Claude Code: The design space
of today’s and future AI agent systems, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.14228.
[18] Junwei Liu, Chen Xu, Chong Wang, Tong Bai, Weitong Chen, Kaseng Wong, Yiling Lou, and Xin Peng.
Towards iterative end-to-end software development: A feature-driven multi-agent framework, 2026.
17

https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.02399. Accepted at the 35th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA 2026).
[19] Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-train,
prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language processing. ACM
Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–35, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3560815. https://doi.org/10.1145/3560815.
[20] Xinghua Lou, Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, Antoine Dedieu, Carter Wendelken, Wolfgang Lehrach, and Kevin P.
Murphy. AutoHarness: Improving LLM agents by automatically synthesizing a code harness, 2026.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.03329.
[21] Pengrui Lu, Shiqi Zhang, Yunzhong Hou, Lyumanshan Ye, Chaoyi Huang, Zixi Chen, Ji Zeng, Hantao
Jiang, Pengfei Liu, Yiwei Wang, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. ProjDevBench: Benchmarking AI Coding Agents
on End-to-End Project Development, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.01655.
[22] Shuai Lu, Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Junjie Huang, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Ambrosio Blanco, Colin
Clement, Dawn Drain, Daxin Jiang, Duyu Tang, Ge Li, Lidong Zhou, Linjun Shou, Long Zhou,
Michele Tufano, Ming Gong, Ming Zhou, Nan Duan, Neel Sundaresan, Shao Kun Deng, Shengyu
Fu, and Shujie Liu. CodeXGLUE: A machine learning benchmark dataset for code understand-
ing and generation. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks, 2021. https://datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
c16a5320fa475530d9583c34fd356ef5-Abstract-round1.html.
[23] Tongxu Luo, Rongsheng Wang, Jiaxi Bi, Chenming Xu, Zhengyang Tang, Jianlong Chen, Juhao Liang,
Ke Ji, Shuqi Guo, Yuhao Du, Fan Bu, Wenyu Du, Xiaotong Zhang, Kyle Li, Shaobo Wang, Linfeng Zhang,
Yuxuan Liu, Xin Lai, Chenxin Li, Yiduo Guo, Zhexin Zhang, Xinyuan Wang, Tianyi Bai, Ziniu Li, and
Benyou Wang. GameCraft-Bench: Can Agents Build Playable Games End-to-End in a Real Game Engine?,
2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.17861.
[24] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Ma-
jumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-Refine: It-
erative refinement with self-feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
ume 36, pages 46534–46594, 2023. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
91edff07232fb1b55a505a9e9f6c0ff3-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[25] Mike A Merrill, Alexander G Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich, Lin Shi,
Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E Kelly Buchanan, et al. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking agents on
hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11868, 2026.
[26] Niels Mündler, Mark Niklas Müller, Jingxuan He, and Martin Vechev.
 SWT-Bench: Testing and
validating real-world bug-fixes with code agents. In Amir Globerson, Lester Mackey, Danielle
Belgrave, Angela Fan, Ulrich Paquet, Jakub Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang, editors, Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pages 81857–81887. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2024. doi: 10.52202/079017-2601. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/
file/94f093b41fc2666376fb1f667fe282f3-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[27] Minh Huynh Nguyen, Thang Phan Chau, Phong X. Nguyen, and Nghi D. Q. Bui. AgileCoder: Dynamic
collaborative agents for software development based on agile methodology. In 2025 IEEE/ACM Second
International Conference on AI Foundation Models and Software Engineering (FORGE), pages 156–167. IEEE,
2025. doi: 10.1109/FORGE66646.2025.00026. https://doi.org/10.1109/FORGE66646.2025.00026.
[28] Gabriel Orlanski, Devjeet Roy, Alexander Yun, Changho Shin, Alex Gu, Albert Ge, Dyah Adila, Nicholas
Roberts, Frederic Sala, and Aws Albarghouthi. SlopCodeBench: Benchmarking how coding agents
degrade over long-horizon iterative tasks, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.24755.
[29] Khouloud Oueslati, Maxime Lamothe, and Foutse Khomh. RefAgent: A Multi-Agent LLM-Based Framework
for Automatic Software Refactoring. In Proceedings of the 48th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.03153.
18

[30] Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez.
MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08560.
[31] Sebastian A. C. Perrig, Nicolas Scharowski, Florian Brühlmann, Nick von Felten, Klaus Opwis, and
Lena Fanya Aeschbach. Independent validation of the player experience inventory: Findings from
a large set of video game players. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’24, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:
10.1145/3613904.3642270. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642270.
[32] Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng
Su, Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. ChatDev: Communicative agents for
software development. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 15174–15186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.810. https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.810/.
[33] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 36, pages 8634–8652, 2023. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2023/file/1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[34] Vero Vanden Abeele, Katta Spiel, Lennart E. Nacke, Daniel Johnson, and Kathrin Gerling. Development
and validation of the player experience inventory: A scale to measure player experiences at the level
of functional and psychosocial consequences. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 135:
102370, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2019.102370. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2019.102370.
[35] Xihuai Wang*, Shao Zhang*, Wenhao Zhang, Wentao Dong, Jingxiao Chen, Ying Wen, and Weinan
Zhang. Zsc-eval: An evaluation toolkit and benchmark for multi-agent zero-shot coordination. The 38th
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks,
2024.
[36] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song,
Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Daniel Shao,
Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, Robert Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and
Graham Neubig. OpenHands: An open platform for AI software developers as generalist agents. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations, pages 65882–65919, 2025. https://proceedings.iclr.
cc/paper_files/paper/2025/file/a4b6ad6b48850c0c331d1259fc66a69c-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[37] Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Gotmare, Nghi D. Q. Bui, Junnan Li, and Steven C. H. Hoi. CodeT5+:
Open code large language models for code understanding and generation. In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1069–1088. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2023. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.68. https://aclanthology.org/
2023.emnlp-main.68/.
[38] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. Demystifying LLM-based software
engineering agents. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering, 2(FSE):801–824, 2025. doi:
10.1145/3715754. https://doi.org/10.1145/3715754.
[39] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
and Ofir Press. SWE-Agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineer-
ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pages 50528–50652, 2024.
doi: 10.52202/079017-1601. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/
5a7c947568c1b1328ccc5230172e1e7c-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[40] John Yang, Kilian Lieret, Jeffrey Ma, Parth Thakkar, Dmitrii Pedchenko, Sten Sootla, Emily McMilin,
Pengcheng Yin, Rui Hou, Gabriel Synnaeve, Diyi Yang, and Ofir Press. ProgramBench: Can Language
Models Rebuild Programs From Scratch?, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.03546.
[41] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
19

ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023. https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X.
[42] Chen Zhang, Qiang He, Zhou Yuan, Elvis S Liu, Hong Wang, Jian Zhao, and Yang Wang. Advancing drl
agents in commercial fighting games: Training, integration, and agent-human alignment. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.01103, 2024.
[43] Chen Zhang, Huan Hu, Yuan Zhou, Qiyang Cao, Ruochen Liu, Wenya Wei, and Elvis S Liu. Training
interactive agent in large fps game map with rule-enhanced reinforcement learning. In 2024 IEEE
Conference on Games (CoG), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2024.
[44] Chen Zhang, Huan Hu, Yuan Zhou, Xu Wang, and Elvis S. Liu. Hifas: A hybrid interactive fps agent system
for large game maps. IEEE Transactions on Games, pages 1–13, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TG.2025.3567869.
[45] Hangfan Zhang, Shao Zhang, Kangcong Li, Chen Zhang, Yang Chen, Yiqun Zhang, Lei Bai, and Shuyue
Hu. Self-Harness: Harnesses that improve themselves, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.09498.
[46] Qizheng Zhang, Changran Hu, Shubhangi Upasani, Boyuan Ma, Fenglu Hong, Vamsidhar Kamanuru, Jay
Rainton, Chen Wu, Mengmeng Ji, Hanchen Li, Urmish Thakker, James Zou, and Kunle Olukotun. Agentic
context engineering: Evolving contexts for self-improving language models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2026. https://openreview.net/forum?id=eC4ygDs02R.
[47] Shao Zhang*, Xihuai Wang*, Wenhao Zhang, Yongshan Chen, Landi Gao, Dakuo Wang, Weinan Zhang,
Xinbing Wang, and Ying Wen. Mutual theory of mind in human-ai collaboration: An empirical study with
llm-driven ai agents in a real-time shared workspace task. Preprint Under Review, 2024.
[48] Shao Zhang*, Xihuai Wang*, Wenhao Zhang, Chaoran Li, Junru Song, Tingyu Li, Lin Qiu, Xuezhi Cao,
Xunliang Cai, Wen Yao, Weinan Zhang, Xinbing Wang, and Ying Wen. Leveraging dual process theory in
language agent framework for real-time simultaneous human-ai collaboration. ACL 2025, 2025.
[49] Wenting Zhao, Nan Jiang, Celine Lee, Justin Chiu, Claire Cardie, Matthias Gallé, and Alexander
Rush. Commit0: Library generation from scratch. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, pages 12061–12076, 2025. https://proceedings.iclr.cc/paper_files/paper/2025/file/
1fcefa894924bb1688041b7a26fb8aea-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[50] Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen Schmidhu-
ber. GPTSwarm: Language agents as optimizable graphs. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 62743–62767.
PMLR, 2024. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhuge24a.html.
20

Supplementary Material
A Method and Implementation Details
A.1 HoH Execution Protocol
This section expands the method specification in the main paper into its executable interfaces. Within
one experimental condition, the Project Planner, Developer, and Quality Assurance (QA) Tester are
three independent invocations of the same harness–model configuration 𝐻. Their model and native
harness capabilities remain fixed, while role-specific instructions determine what each invocation
may read, modify, and return. The three roles coordinate around the same evolving software artifact.
The Developer writes to the active project workspace, whereas the Planner consumes materialized
documents and the QA Tester inspects an isolated copy of the current artifact. The latter two return
structured records rather than modifying the active artifact through an interactive conversation.
Table 4 details the implementation-level inputs and outputs corresponding to the notation in the main
paper. The Planner receives the public specification S and preceding evidence E
𝑡−1 
and produces the
current development document 𝐷
𝑡
. The Developer receives S and 𝐷
𝑡 
in the workspace containing
𝐴
𝑡−1 
and writes the updated artifact 𝐴
𝑡
. The QA Tester receives S, 𝐷
𝑡
, and 𝐴
𝑡
, executes and inspects
the artifact, and produces E
𝑡
.
Accordingly, one HoH iteration is implemented by three harness invocations:
𝐷
𝑡 
= Plan
𝐻 
(S
, E
𝑡−1
) 
,
𝐴
𝑡 
= Dev
𝐻 
( 
𝐴
𝑡−1
; S, 𝐷
𝑡
) 
,
E
𝑡 
= Test
𝐻 
( 
𝐴
𝑡
; S, 𝐷
𝑡
) 
.
(3)
The three invocations share the fixed configuration 𝐻, but each receives the role-specific inputs shown
in Table 4. The artifact and evidence bundle cross the iteration boundary; within iteration 𝑡, 𝐷
𝑡
provides the common specification for coding and testing.
21

Table 4 | Inputs, invocation contracts, and materialized outputs of the three HoH roles. All roles use the
harness–model configuration associated with the corresponding experimental condition.
Role Inputs Invocation contract Materialized output
Project Planner S and E
𝑡−1 
Select bounded priorities from public
requirements and preceding
evidence; identify verified
functionality to preserve; specify
observable acceptance requirements;
do not modify production code
Development
document 𝐷
𝑡
Developer S, 𝐷
𝑡 
, and the workspace
containing 𝐴
𝑡−1
Address prioritized targets with
native coding tools; preserve verified
functionality; keep the project
buildable and runnable; write
changes into the existing workspace
Updated artifact 𝐴
𝑡
and execution records
QA Tester S, 𝐷
𝑡 
, 𝐴
𝑡 
, and public
execution records
Derive checkable claims; execute and
inspect the artifact; associate findings
with observable records; distinguish
supported functionality from
unresolved or insufficiently
evidenced requirements
Evidence bundle E
𝑡
A.2 Role-Specific Prompt Construction
Each role prompt is rendered from reusable Markdown modules and runtime values. The fixed
modules specify role boundaries, public-information policy, and the output contract; runtime slots
insert the public task, current iteration state, materialized documents, and execution records. The
public task specification is inserted without modification. At 𝑡 = 1, the Planner’s evidence slot is empty;
for 𝑡 > 1, it contains the structured evidence bundle from the preceding artifact. The templates below
are schematic, interface-preserving renderings of the runtime prompts: they retain the role contracts
and data dependencies used by the method while omitting repeated benchmark-specific examples
and checklists. In the templates, {{runtime_slot}} denotes substituted content, /workspace/path
denotes a materialized file or directory, and [conditional module] denotes a block included only
when its runtime condition is satisfied.
Project Planner Prompt
Template assembly. [role instruction] ⊕ [public specification] ⊕ [preceding evidence] ⊕
[document scaffold] ⊕ [output contract]
Method correspondence. 
(S
, E
𝑡−1
) 
Plan
𝐻
−−−−→ 𝐷
𝑡
/role/project-planner
You are the Project Planner for iteration {{loop_index}} of an iterative software-development run. This is
a planning-only harness invocation. Do not implement, edit, test, or inspect production code. Return only
a prioritization overlay for the deterministic development document.
/source-of-truth
The public {{task_source_name}} specification below is the complete product source of truth. Do not use
benchmark scores, hidden tests, private rubrics, evaluator feedback, or other non-public information.
{{public_task_instruction}}
22

Project Planner Prompt (continued)
/previous-iteration-evidence
{{evidence_packet}}
For iteration 1, there is no previous-iteration evidence. For later iterations, identify verified functionality
to preserve, visible bugs and unmet requirements to repair, and evidence that remains insufficient. Do not
request or reconstruct the previous development document.
/planning-policy
Prioritize blockers and regressions before product extensions. Select at most three achievable priorities
already supported by the document scaffold. Convert each priority into a concrete implementation target
and an observable validation requirement; avoid broad rewrites or unrelated architecture changes.
/document-scaffold
{{scaffold_document}}
/output-contract
Return only the following Markdown structure:
## Project Planner Priorities
### Priority Order
1. **Priority name** – action and observable outcome
### Preservation Gate
- Working functionality and evidence that must not regress
### Acceptance Gate
- Smallest end-to-end validation for the selected priorities
23

Developer Prompt
Template assembly. [benchmark guidance] ⊕ [iteration wrapper] ⊕ [warm-start block] ⊕
[development document]
Method correspondence. 
( 
𝐴
𝑡−1
; S, 𝐷
𝑡 
) 
Dev
𝐻
−−−−→ 𝐴
𝑡
/role/developer
You are the Developer for iteration {{loop_index}}. Build or improve the complete project at
/workspace/game 
. Treat the public task instruction as the PRD and the current development document as
the implementation and validation brief for this iteration.
/iteration-context
# Outer-loop attempt {{attempt}}
[if warm-started: {{warm_start_section}}]
Continue from the artifact already present in /workspace/game . Preserve verified functionality and repair
the next observable gap rather than replacing a working project with a smaller reset.
/development-document
Current document: {{development_doc_filename}}
Planning inputs: {{planning_inputs}}
Build status: {{build_ok}}
Observed demos: {{num_demos}}
{{public_task_instruction}}
{{focus_items}}
{{preserve_visible_section}}
{{development_brief}}
{{evidence_history_section}}
/development-policy
Repair build and runtime blockers first, then address the ordered targets in the document. Use the
harness’s native file, repository, shell, build, execution, and local-testing tools. Keep the project launchable
and make every claimed mechanic observable through a valid replay trace. Public assets may be read
from /workspace/assets/library and /workspace/assets/library-oga ; copied assets count only
when they are visibly used by the artifact.
/output-contract
Leave the updated artifact in /workspace/game , including /workspace/game/project.godot , a
launchable main scene, and valid /workspace/game/demo_outputs/*.json traces. Preserve the public
runtime records required for QA testing.
QA Tester Prompt
Template assembly. [tester role] ⊕ [phase instruction] ⊕ [development document] ⊕ [media
manifest] ⊕ [phase-specific output contract]
Method correspondence. 
( 
𝐴
𝑡 
; S, 𝐷
𝑡 
) 
Test
𝐻
−−−−→ E
𝑡
/role/qa-tester
You are the QA Tester for iteration {{loop_index}}. Review the updated artifact as a player-facing
product using only the public task text, the current development document, visible project files,
screenshots, replay traces, and videos. Do not modify production code.
{{tester_phase_instruction}}
/inputs
Task directory: {{task_dir}}
Trial: {{trial_name}}
Trial directory: {{trial_dir}}
24

QA Tester Prompt (continued)
Development document: {{development_doc_filename}}
/development-document
{{development_document}}
/public-visual-evidence
{{media_lines}}
/assessment-policy
Derive checkable claims from the public requirements and validation targets. Assign a claim–evidence
record to the verified subset only when the cited execution records provide sufficient observable support.
Record visible failures, regressions, unmet requirements, and insufficient evidence as gaps. Inspect replay
event types and reject traces that cannot be reproduced through the public mouse, keyboard, and
wait-event interface.
/restrictions
Do not read, list, infer from, or summarize /tests , benchmark scores, private evaluator files, hidden task
metadata, formulas, or host-only materials outside the public task and generated artifact.
/output-contract
Write visual_playtest_report.md and visual_playtest_report.json. Each report records status, cited
evidence, player impact, issue ownership, and a concrete recommendation.
[next-loop phase: remaining bugs, preservation records, and next-loop goals]
{{tester_phase_output_contract}}
The QA prompt requests evidence-bearing findings in a benchmark-appropriate JSON report. The
report need not reproduce the mathematical tuple notation verbatim. After the QA invocation, the
benchmark adapter normalizes its claims, cited execution records, and statuses into the evidence
bundle E
𝑡 
used in the main paper. Thus, Test
𝐻 
denotes the complete testing interface, including both
evidence collection by the QA Tester and deterministic normalization of its report.
A.3 Development Tools and Workspace Operations
HoH does not replace the tools exposed by the underlying coding harness. Instead, the Developer
uses those tools under the current development document and writes all changes to the same project
workspace. The workspace contains source code, configuration, project resources, and any public
runtime artifacts produced during development. Warm-starting therefore preserves not only source
files but also the project structure and resources required to continue development from 𝐴
𝑡−1
.
Table 5 summarizes the principal capabilities used by the implementation. The exact commands
depend on the selected harness and benchmark, but the role of each capability is fixed across iterations.
25

Table 5 | Development and inspection capabilities used by HoH. Private benchmark evaluators and their
outputs are excluded from these interfaces.
Capability Representative operations Retained records
Project operations Inspect and edit source files, configuration,
assets, and repository state
Updated files and change
state
Build and execution Invoke shell commands, build the project,
launch the artifact, and run public local checks
Exit status, standard output,
standard error, and runtime
logs
Game interaction Launch Godot scenes, exercise controls, and
execute deterministic interaction traces
Replay traces and observable
state transitions
Visual inspection Capture screenshots or videos and inspect
visible asset use, interface state, feedback, and
result screens
Media manifest and
referenced frames
Task-specific tools Use public benchmark containers,
dependencies, and task-provided verification
utilities where available
Public test and execution
results
For GameCraft-Bench, 𝐴
𝑡 
is a Godot project containing source scripts, scenes, configuration, assets, and
replay outputs. The benchmark adapter materializes the current development document as additional
context for the Developer and records the harness command, process outcome, and resulting trial. For
FrontierSWE, the same interfaces operate on the task repository and its public execution environment.
Benchmark-specific adapters change how an artifact is launched and observed; they do not change
the planning, coding, or testing roles.
A.4 Evidence Collection and Representation
The QA stage and benchmark adapter together convert observable behavior into the claim–evidence
records defined in the main paper. The correspondence is
C
𝑡 
= Claims(S, 𝐷
𝑡
),
𝑟
𝑖 
= Observe( 𝐴
𝑡
, 𝑐
𝑖
),
𝑠
𝑖 
= Assess(𝑐
𝑖
, 𝑟
𝑖
),
E
𝑡 
= 
{(
𝑐
𝑖
, 𝑟
𝑖
, 𝑠
𝑖
)}
𝑐
𝑖 
∈ C
𝑡 
.
(4)
Here, C
𝑡 
contains the checkable claims, 𝑟
𝑖 
denotes the public execution records collected for claim 𝑐
𝑖
,
and 𝑠
𝑖 
is the normalized QA status. Claims are instantiated from the public requirements, current
development targets, preservation constraints, and validation requirements.
Evidence collection first executes or inspects the artifact using the capabilities above. Build and test
outcomes establish whether the artifact can run; runtime logs and traces expose state transitions;
screenshots, videos, and replays provide player-visible observations; and asset inspection determines
whether project resources are used in the executed artifact. Source-code presence alone is not treated
as behavioral verification.
The QA Tester then assesses every claim against its cited records. A record is placed in E
ver
𝑡 
only
when the evidence visibly supports the corresponding claim. Observed failures, unmet requirements,
regression risks, and claims without sufficient evidence are placed in E
gap
𝑡 
. Formally, the two subsets
26

are 
E
ver
𝑡 
= 
{(
𝑐
𝑖
, 𝑟
𝑖
, 𝑠
𝑖
) ∈ E
𝑡 
| 𝑠
𝑖 
= verified
} 
,
E
gap
𝑡 
= 
{(
𝑐
𝑖
, 𝑟
𝑖
, 𝑠
𝑖
) ∈ E
𝑡 
| 𝑠
𝑖 
= gap
} 
. 
(5)
They form a disjoint partition of the evidence bundle:
E
𝑡 
= E
ver
𝑡 
∪ E
gap
𝑡 
, E
ver
𝑡 
∩ E
gap
𝑡 
= ∅. (6)
The implementation retains both a human-readable tester report and structured records for subsequent
planning. Listing 1 shows a normalized excerpt organized according to the verified- and gap-record
subsets above. Each record preserves the claim, the public execution records used to assess it, and
the resulting status. The final block shows how these records are converted into planning inputs for
the next iteration.
27

Listing 1 Normalized structured evidence report. Each claim is linked to its public execution records
and QA status. Verified records yield preservation constraints, whereas gap records yield update
targets and follow-up validation requirements for the next iteration.
1 {
2 " iteration ": 2,
3 " qa_status ": " partial ",
4 " verified_records ": [
5 {
6 " claim_id ": " player_control ",
7 " claim ": " Player input changes avatar motion ." ,
8 " execution_records ": [
9 {
10 " type ": " replay ",
11 " path ": " replays / core_loop . json ",
12 " observation ": " Left and right inputs move the avatar ."
13 },
14 {
15 " type ": " runtime_trace ",
16 " path ": " traces / core_loop . json ",
17 " observation ": " Position changes after each input event ."
18 }
19 ],
20 " status ": " verified "
21 }
22 ],
23 " gap_records ": [
24 {
25 " claim_id ": " result_state ",
26 " claim ": " Completing the objective produces a visible result ." ,
27 " execution_records ": [
28 {
29 " type ": " screenshot ",
30 " path ": " screenshots / frame_018 . png ",
31 " observation ": " The objective ends without a result screen ."
32 }
33 ],
34 " status ": " gap ",
35 " player_impact ": " Completion is not visible to the player ." ,
36 " recommended_update ": " Add and replay a result state ."
37 }
38 ],
39 " planner_handoff ": {
40 " preservation_constraints ": [
41 " Preserve verified player movement ."
42 ],
43 " update_targets ": [
44 " Implement a visible completion state ."
45 ],
46 " validation_requirements ": [
47 " Replay objective completion through the result screen ."
48 ]
49 }
50 }
For GameCraft-Bench, the evidence bundle is materialized through a screenshot manifest, playtest
report, structured status record, replay traces, and tester logs. FrontierSWE uses the same claim–
evidence abstraction with the public execution and task-specific test records available in its repository
28

environment.
A.5 Cross-Iteration State Transfer and Evaluation Isolation
The implementation preserves the two state channels defined in the main paper. The artifact channel
carries the updated project 𝐴
𝑡 
into the next Developer invocation, while the evidence channel carries
E
𝑡 
into the next Planner invocation. Within iteration 𝑡, 𝐷
𝑡 
is the shared specification for coding and
testing; the next Planner constructs a new document from S and E
𝑡 
rather than treating 𝐷
𝑡 
as a third
persistent state channel.
The implementation retains the development document, harness command, process logs, public
media manifest, structured QA report, and resulting project workspace for each iteration. These
records make the transition from 𝐴
𝑡−1 
to 𝐴
𝑡 
and the construction of E
𝑡 
auditable without exposing
evaluator-only information.
Benchmark evaluation is separated from development. Hidden tests, benchmark scores, private
rubrics, evaluation formulas, and evaluator rationales are not included in the role prompts or evidence
bundle and are never returned to a subsequent iteration. HoH therefore adapts to observable execution
and QA findings while the public task specification remains the authoritative requirement source.
29

B Experimental Protocol
B.1 Harness and Model Configurations
Table 6 lists the three configurations used throughout the main experiments. Harness versions, models,
and exposed reasoning settings are held fixed between Vanilla and HoH within each configuration.
The main HoH results use 𝑇 = 3.
Table 6 | Harness–model configurations used in the experiments.
Harness Version Model Reasoning setting
Codex CLI
1 
0.142.5 GPT-5.5 High
OpenCode
2 
1.14.30 DeepSeek-V4-Pro —
Pi Coding Agent
3 
0.80.10 MiniMax-M3 Client-side high
B.2 Run Configuration and Repetition
The main experiments use three HoH iterations. Vanilla performs one standard development pass, and
the budget-controlled experiment additionally evaluates two and three sequential Vanilla development
passes. HoH reports the artifact produced after the prescribed iteration budget; intermediate artifacts
are evaluated only for analysis and are not selected using benchmark scores. Evaluator outputs are
not returned to the planning, coding, or testing stages.
Table 7 summarizes the run structure used for each experiment. Every reported task–condition
score is obtained from one valid run. When an attempt fails because of an infrastructure or model-
provider transport error, the failed attempt is replaced rather than included as an additional replicate.
Aggregate scores therefore average over tasks, not over multiple generations of the same task–condition
pair.
Table 7 | Run configurations used in the reported experiments.
Experiment Benchmark Development structure Runs per
task–condition
Main comparison GameCraft-Bench and
FrontierSWE
Vanilla: one coding pass;
HoH: 𝑇 = 3 iterations
1
Budget comparison GameCraft-Bench Vanilla Continuation: one,
two, or three coding
passes; HoH: 𝑇 = 3
1
Ablation study GameCraft-Bench Full HoH and each
ablation: 𝑇 = 3
1
Task–condition runs start from separate copies of the benchmark-provided workspace. Within a
harness–model configuration, Vanilla and HoH use the same model, native harness settings, public
task materials, and benchmark tools. The selected clients do not expose a common reproducible
generation seed, and we do not override temperature or top-𝑝; the corresponding client and provider
1
https://github.com/openai/codex
2
https://github.com/anomalyco/opencode
3
https://github.com/earendil-works/pi
30

defaults are used throughout. The fixed seeds reported below control task sampling and statistical
resampling rather than model generation.
B.3 Computing Environments
The two benchmarks use different execution environments because they exercise different software
artifacts. Table 8 records the shared runtime components. Model inference is provided through
the remote services associated with the configurations in Table 6; the listed machines execute the
harnesses, generated artifacts, and benchmark verifiers.
Table 8 | Computing environments used for artifact development and evaluation. FrontierSWE task images
retain their benchmark-defined dependencies and resource declarations.
Component GameCraft-Bench FrontierSWE
Isolation Run-local workspace in a
local-subprocess environment
Official task container launched through
a run-local Docker daemon
Host Ubuntu 24.04.3; Intel Core i7-14700; 64
GB RAM
Linux compute workers; NVIDIA H200
for tasks requiring a GPU
Runtime Python 3.12.3; Godot 4.6.2;
Xvfb-backed display capture
Docker with the official task-specific
software image
Resource control No task-specific GPU allocation CPU, memory, storage, and GPU limits
specified by each official task
FrontierSWE uses a Docker-in-Docker execution design. An outer execution container starts a run-
local Docker daemon, which launches the official task-specific image. The inner container receives the
CPU, memory, storage, and accelerator limits declared by that task. GPU passthrough is enabled only
for tasks that request an accelerator. This preserves the task software stack and prevents dependencies
from one task from affecting another.
B.4 Benchmark Sampling and Evaluated Tasks
Table 9 summarizes the benchmark subsets used in the main experiments. GameCraft-Bench [23] is
sampled by its 15 public game families and is additionally organized into five coarse reporting groups
for analysis. FrontierSWE [6] uses the benchmark’s three official categories.
Table 9 | Composition of the evaluated benchmark subsets. Counts refer to the tasks used for every harness–
model configuration in the main experiments.
Benchmark Tasks 
Fine
categories 
Reporting
groups
Tasks per
category
GameCraft-Bench 45 15 5 3 per family
FrontierSWE 15 3 3 4 / 9 / 2
B.4.1 GameCraft-Bench
We use a fixed 45-task subset with three tasks from each of the benchmark’s 15 public game families.
The subset was constructed incrementally from a fixed earlier subset and completed to three tasks
per family by seeded stratified sampling (seed 20260707), without reference to model scores.
31

For compact reporting, we group the 15 families into five coarse categories, each containing three
families and nine tasks: Action contains Platformer, Shooter, and Roguelike; Timing contains Racing,
Rhythm, and Sports; Strategy contains Strategy, Card Game, and Puzzle; Simulation contains Tycoon,
Idle, and Simulation; and Adventure contains Horror, Open World, and Visual Novel. These five
groups are introduced only for aggregate analysis; all task scores continue to use the benchmark’s
original family definitions.
Table 10 | GameCraft-Bench reporting groups, benchmark families, and sampled tasks. Each family contributes
three tasks.
Family Task Benchmark identifier
Action
Platformer
Momentum Lab platformer-momentum-lab
Ivory Beats platformer-ivory-beats
Thunder Valkyrie platformer-thunder-valkyrie
Shooter
Void Patrol shooter-void-patrol
Wave Commander shooter-wave-commander
Hotline Heist shooter-hotline-heist
Roguelike
Dungeon Shop roguelike-dungeon-shop
Breach Tactics roguelike-breach-tactics
Void Harvest roguelike-action-void-harvest
Timing
Racing
Drift Circuit racing-drift-circuit
Rocket Trials racing-rocket-trials
Trick Runner racing-trick-runner
Rhythm
Note Highway rhythm-note-highway
Beat Dungeon rhythm-beat-dungeon
Garden rhythm-garden
Sports
Skateboard Park sports-skateboard-park
Boxing Gym sports-boxing-gym
Archery Quest sports-archery-quest
Strategy
Strategy
Tower Defense strategy-towerdefense
Chess Variant strategy-chess-variant
Spell Tactics strategy-spell-tactics
Card Game
Spire Descent cardgame-spire-descent
Poker Roguelike cardgame-poker-roguelike
Autobattler cardgame-autobattler
Puzzle
Sokoban Dungeon puzzle-sokoban-dungeon
Circuit Wizard puzzle-circuit-wizard
Pipe Crisis puzzle-pipe-crisis
Simulation
Tycoon
Space Colony tycoon-space-colony
Pirate Port tycoon-pirate-port
Wildhaven tycoon-wildhaven
Idle
Ant Empire idle-ant-empire
Factory Planet idle-factory-planet
Dungeon Guild idle-dungeon-guild
Simulation
Kitchen Rush simulation-kitchen-rush
Air Control simulation-air-control
Border Check simulation-border-check
32

Table 10 (continued)
Family Task Benchmark identifier
Adventure
Horror
Floor 13 horror-floor-13
Dollhouse horror-dollhouse
Lighthouse horror-lighthouse
Open World
Sky Islands openworld-sky-islands
Airship Trader openworld-airship-trader
Bounty openworld-bounty
Visual Novel
Detective Noir visualnovel-detective-noir
Arcane Academy visualnovel-arcaneacademy
Time Paradox visualnovel-time-paradox
B.4.2 FrontierSWE
We evaluate 15 FrontierSWE tasks under the benchmark’s official taxonomy: four Implementation
tasks, nine Performance tasks, and two Research tasks. We additionally distinguish tasks that construct
an independent deliverable from a scaffold or task specification from those that optimize an existing
system. Under this criterion, 10 tasks are labeled end-to-end and five are labeled optimization.
Table 11 | FrontierSWE tasks grouped by official category and construction scope.
Task Scope Brief task description
Implementation
Dart Style Haskell End-to-end Reimplement the Dart formatter in Haskell as a Cabal-built
executable compatible with the relevant CLI behavior and
golden formatting cases.
Git to Zig End-to-end Reimplement Git 2.47 as a Zig binary compatible with Git’s
CLI, output, and exit-code behavior, without reusing the
existing Git implementation or network access.
Lua Native Compiler End-to-end Compile Lua 5.4 bytecode to a standalone native x86-64
executable with reference-equivalent output, rather than an
interpreter or API wrapper.
PostgreSQL–SQLite Wire
Adapter
End-to-end Build a Zig server backed by SQLite that emulates the
required PostgreSQL server, wire-protocol, lifecycle, and CLI
behavior.
Performance
Cranelift Codegen
Optimization
Optimization Optimize compiled WebAssembly runtime performance in
Wasmtime’s Cranelift backend, subject to correctness gates
and weighted speedup scoring.
Dependent Type Checker End-to-end Implement a correct, high-throughput Martin-Löf type
checker in Rust; correctness thresholds must be met before
throughput is scored.
FFmpeg Swscale Rewrite End-to-end 
Rewrite libswscale in Zig or Rust behind its required C ABI,
with image-quality gates before geometric-mean speedup
scoring.
Granite Mamba2 Inference
Optimization
Optimization Optimize a standalone Granite Mamba2 layer while
preserving CUDA bfloat16 outputs and cache behavior across
the evaluated workloads.
33

Table 11 (continued)
Task Scope Brief task description
Inference System
Optimization
Optimization Accelerate a Qwen-based SGLang serving system while
preserving token-level output equivalence under latency and
throughput workloads.
Libexpat to x86 Assembly End-to-end Reimplement the required libexpat API as an independent
x86-64 assembly shared library without delegating to the
existing implementation.
Notebook Compression End-to-end Build a lossless domain-specific notebook compressor with
fit, compress, and decompress interfaces; exact recovery is
required before compression ratio is scored.
Pyright Type-Checking
Optimization
Optimization Optimize Pyright’s type-evaluation hot paths while
preserving build success, all required tests, and
reference-equivalent diagnostics.
Revideo Performance
Optimization
Optimization Optimize Revideo’s programmatic rendering pipeline
without frame skipping, quality reduction, resolution
changes, or visible-output deviations.
Research
Optimizer Design End-to-end Implement one torch.optim.Optimizer and a shared
hyperparameter configuration that generalizes across
heterogeneous ML workloads.
PCQM4Mv2 Autoresearch End-to-end Train a 2D molecular-graph regressor under data, model,
and parameter constraints to minimize the evaluated
molecular-property error.
Two official FrontierSWE tasks are not included in the evaluated subset. Their omission is determined
by execution requirements rather than model outcomes.
Table 12 | FrontierSWE tasks excluded from the evaluated subset.
Task Reason
frogsgame-rl Requires authenticated access to the external Tinker API, which was
unavailable in the evaluation environment.
modular-stack-wan21 Requires a Modular MAX software stack needing an NVIDIA driver of at
least 580 (CUDA 13), whereas the available H200 worker used driver
570.133.20.
B.5 Baseline and Budget-Controlled Protocols
Vanilla. Vanilla uses the corresponding harness–model configuration without the HoH protocol and
performs one standard development pass from the benchmark-provided initial artifact.
Vanilla Continuation. The budget-controlled comparison extends the selected Vanilla artifact
through two additional invocations of the same harness–model configuration. Let 𝐴
VC
1 
denote the
artifact produced by the standard Vanilla pass. For 𝑘 ∈ {2, 3}, Vanilla Continuation applies
𝐴
VC
𝑘 
= Dev
𝐻

𝐴
VC
𝑘−1
; S, 𝑝
cont

, (7)
34

where 𝑝
cont 
is the fixed instruction shown below. Thus, each additional pass starts from the latest
artifact, but receives neither a development document nor evidence from a separate QA Tester
invocation.
Vanilla Continuation Prompt
Continue developing and testing the current game.
The comparison therefore holds the initial task set and harness–model configuration fixed while
separating repeated coding passes from the planning–coding–testing structure of HoH.
B.6 Ablation Protocols
The ablations retain the three-iteration budget and the same harness–model configuration as full HoH.
Relative to the full iteration in Eq. 3, each variant changes one cross-iteration input while leaving the
remaining interfaces unchanged:
w/o Plan Update: 𝐷
𝑡 
= 𝐷
1
, 𝑡 > 1,
w/o Evidence Feedback: 𝐷
𝑡 
= Plan
𝐻 
(S
, ∅)
 
,
w/o Warm-Start: 𝐴
𝑡 
= Dev
𝐻 
( 
𝐴
0
; S, 𝐷
𝑡
) 
.
(8)
In w/o Plan Update, the first development document is reused in all later iterations, although coding
and testing continue on the evolving artifact. In w/o Evidence Feedback, the QA Tester still evaluates
each updated artifact, but its evidence is withheld from the next Planner invocation. In w/o Warm-
Start, evidence-conditioned planning and QA testing remain active, while every Developer invocation
begins from the benchmark-provided initial artifact 𝐴
0
.
Table 13 | Information channels retained by the ablation variants.
Variant Development document Coding start Evidence for next plan
Full HoH Updated from preceding
evidence
𝐴
𝑡−1 
E
𝑡−1
w/o Plan Update Fixed to 𝐷
1 
𝐴
𝑡−1 
Not consumed
w/o Evidence Feedback Updated from S only 𝐴
𝑡−1 
Withheld
w/o Warm-Start Updated from preceding
evidence
𝐴
0 
E
𝑡−1
B.7 Metrics and Resource Accounting
GameCraft-Bench dimensions. GameCraft-Bench evaluates runnable game artifacts along four
dimensions. Core Mechanics measures implementation of the required gameplay mechanics and
interaction loop. Content Depth measures the breadth and variety of stages, challenges, objectives,
and progression. Functional Visuals measures the visibility, readability, and feedback of gameplay
states. Art and Presentation measures visual coherence, asset quality, interface styling, and polish.
Let 𝑀, 𝐷, 𝑉, and 𝐴 denote the mean rubric-item scores for these four dimensions, respectively.
GameCraft-Bench Overall. The benchmark combines the four dimensions as
Overall = 100𝐵 
(
0.15𝑀 + 0.35𝐷 + 0.15𝑉 + 0.35𝐴
) 
, (9)
where 𝐵 = 1 if the game artifact compiles and runs and 𝐵 = 0 otherwise.
35

FrontierSWE reward. We report the task-specific official reward and its mean over the 15 evaluated
tasks.
Task-level aggregation. For a benchmark task set B and evaluated condition 𝑐, the reported
aggregate is the unweighted mean of its task-level scores:
𝑠
B 
(𝑐) = 
1
|B|
∑︁
 
𝑖∈ B
𝑠
𝑖 
(𝑐). (10)
For GameCraft-Bench, 𝑠
𝑖 
is the 0–100 Overall score and |B| = 45; for FrontierSWE, 𝑠
𝑖 
is the official
reward and |B| = 15.
Bootstrap uncertainty. The 95% confidence intervals for the GameCraft-Bench component analysis
in the main paper are percentile intervals from 20,000 task-bootstrap resamples. Tasks are sampled
with replacement, all four component scores for a sampled task are retained together, and means are
recomputed for every resample. The bootstrap uses seed 20260729.
Model-interaction volume. Token counts include the provider-reported input and output tokens
from coding-harness model calls and exclude benchmark evaluation. Input totals may include cached
context reads, whose accounting differs across providers. Let I
𝑖 
(𝑐) denote the model calls made for
task 𝑖 under condition 𝑐. Cumulative token use, in millions of tokens, is
𝐶
𝑖 
(𝑐) = 10
−6
∑︁
𝑗∈ I
𝑖 
(𝑐)

𝑛
in
𝑗 
+ 𝑛
out
𝑗

, 
𝐶 (𝑐) = 
1
|B|
∑︁
 
𝑖∈ B
𝐶
𝑖 
(𝑐). (11)
We compare token usage within each harness–model configuration because cache accounting differs
across providers. In the budget-controlled comparison, we also report the quality gained per additional
million tokens relative to Vanilla:
𝜂(𝑐) = 
𝑠
GC 
(𝑐) − 𝑠
GC 
(Vanilla)
𝐶 (𝑐) − 𝐶 (Vanilla) 
. (12)
36

Official dominance. We apply the official dominance procedure to the final 15-task subset. Within
each domain, the comparison pool contains all 3 × 4 = 12 system–condition configurations: the three
systems under Vanilla, HoH@1, HoH@2, and HoH@3. For a configuration 𝑎, let 𝑑 denote a domain,
let 𝑡 denote a task in that domain, and let 𝑟
𝑎,𝑡 
denote 𝑎’s official reward on 𝑡.
All pairwise comparisons occur on the same task. For any opponent 𝑗 among the other 11 configura-
tions, the comparison score is
𝑠(𝑥, 𝑦) =








1, 𝑥 > 𝑦,
0.5, 𝑥 = 𝑦,
0, 𝑥 < 𝑦.
(13)
The task-level dominance of 𝑎 is therefore
Dominance
𝑑,𝑡 
(𝑎) = 
1
11
∑︁
 
𝑗≠𝑎
𝑠(𝑟
𝑎,𝑡
, 𝑟
𝑗,𝑡
). (14)
Equivalently, this quantity is the expected comparison score when the opponent is selected uniformly
from the other 11 configurations. The implementation computes this expectation exactly by averaging
over all 11 opponents. The denominator is 11 because 𝑎 is compared with every other member of the
12-configuration pool, but not with itself. Domain-level dominance averages these values equally over
the 𝑁
𝑑 
tasks in domain 𝑑:
Dominance
𝑑 
(𝑎) = 
1
𝑁
𝑑
𝑁
𝑑
∑︁
𝑡=1
"
1
11
∑︁
 
𝑗≠𝑎
𝑠(𝑟
𝑎,𝑡
, 𝑟
𝑗,𝑡
)
#
. (15)
Here, 𝑁
𝑑 
is 4, 9, and 2 for Implementation, Performance, and Research, respectively. The reported
FrontierSWE dominance is the macro average over the three domains:
Dominance(𝑎) = 
1
3
∑︁
 
𝑑
Dominance
𝑑 
(𝑎). (16)
In this expression, 𝑑 ranges over Implementation, Performance, and Research, and each domain
receives equal weight.
37

B.8 Player-Experience Evaluation and PXI Aggregation
The source-blinded Fusepoint playtest uses the full Player Experience Inventory (PXI) [34]. The
validated core comprises ten constructs, each measured by three items on the official seven-point
scale from −3 to +3. For evaluator 𝑝, construct 𝑘, and its three item responses 𝑥
𝑝,𝑘, 𝑗
, we compute
𝑠
𝑝,𝑘 
= 
1
3
3
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑥
𝑝,𝑘, 𝑗
. (17)
The official questionnaire’s separate three-item Enjoyment outcome is scored in the same way but is
not treated as an eleventh core PXI construct. For each reported outcome, the main-paper table gives
the mean and sample standard deviation of 𝑠
𝑝,𝑘 
across evaluators; individual ratings and comments
are retained for auditability.
We do not compute a global PXI total. A review conducted during an independent validation found
that some prior applications averaged the ten, or sometimes eleven, outcomes into a single general
player-experience score. However, the preregistered validation with 1,518 players found better fit for
the ten-factor model—or the eleven-factor model when Enjoyment is included—than for models with
a general player-experience factor or higher-order consequence factors [31]. We therefore interpret
the constructs separately. The main-paper table additionally reports unweighted descriptive averages
over the five Functional and five Psychosocial construct scores for compact summary; these averages
are not treated as validated higher-order PXI scales. No score combining all ten constructs, sum-score,
percentage conversion, or cutoff is reported as a PXI total.
B.9 Reproducibility Artifacts
The anonymous code package accompanying the submission contains the core HoH implementation,
role prompt templates, the GameCraft-Bench adapter, and the necessary wrappers for the evaluated
harness–model configurations. Benchmark repositories, task data, raw run artifacts, analysis records,
environment files, private credentials, provider secrets, and benchmark-hidden evaluator contents
are not included.
38

C Complete Experimental Results
C.1 GameCraft-Bench Per-Task Scores
Figure 7 summarizes Vanilla and HoH@3 over the five reporting groups before the complete task-level
results. Each bar is the unweighted mean of the nine tasks in that group.
Action
Timing
Strategy
Simulation
Adventure
0
20
40
60
80
Overall score
Codex + GPT-5.5 (high)
Action
Timing
Strategy
Simulation
Adventure
OpenCode + DeepSeek-V4-Pro
Action
Timing
Strategy
Simulation
Adventure
Pi + MiniMax-M3
Vanilla HoH@3
Figure 7 | GameCraft-Bench Overall scores by reporting group and harness–model configuration. Each group
contains nine tasks.
Tables 14–16 report the four observed conditions for every sampled GameCraft-Bench task. Scores are
converted to the benchmark’s 0–100 presentation scale and grouped using the five coarse categories
defined in Table 10. The final column reports the task-specific change from Vanilla to HoH@3.
Table 14 | Complete GameCraft-Bench task scores for Codex + GPT-5.5 (high). Scores use the benchmark’s
0–100 scale; Δ denotes HoH@3 minus Vanilla.
Family Task Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3 Δ
Action
Platformer Momentum Lab 34.05 64.44 56.15 70.61 +36.56
Ivory Beats 46.81 73.28 78.55 85.42 +38.61
Thunder Valkyrie 53.51 68.24 71.82 73.67 +20.15
Shooter Void Patrol 58.59 73.90 76.02 87.83 +29.23
Wave Commander 66.97 69.35 74.64 75.25 +8.28
Hotline Heist 43.37 35.71 59.17 62.81 +19.44
Roguelike Dungeon Shop 40.89 50.55 50.15 
65.09 +24.20
Breach Tactics 53.44 55.67 57.11 61.09 +7.65
Void Harvest 41.05 46.39 55.43 57.43 +16.38
Timing
Racing Drift Circuit 43.58 58.29 60.29 70.08 +26.50
Rocket Trials 45.19 61.32 68.00 70.31 +25.12
Trick Runner 51.50 36.09 54.44 64.78 +13.28
Rhythm Note Highway 39.44 31.35 56.15 64.68 +25.24
Beat Dungeon 47.94 56.95 60.55 
60.81 +12.88
Garden 52.75 65.33 69.01 70.69 +17.94
Sports Skateboard Park 57.64 69.51 72.62 81.14 +23.49
Boxing Gym 43.08 40.34 45.61 73.14 +30.06
Archery Quest 58.09 64.96 71.56 
76.69 +18.60
Strategy
Strategy Tower Defense 58.85 63.98 64.12 
76.92 +18.07
Chess Variant 30.04 56.93 52.83 59.72 +29.68
39

Table 14 (continued)
Family Task Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3 Δ
Spell Tactics 53.10 47.39 60.70 63.32 +10.22
Card Game Spire Descent 25.85 45.47 54.81 61.92 +36.07
Poker Roguelike 44.66 63.94 67.99 69.27 +24.61
Autobattler 55.06 72.39 71.28 
72.22 +17.16
Puzzle Sokoban Dungeon 55.75 58.98 58.56 70.13 +14.38
Circuit Wizard 31.35 38.97 40.82 49.52 +18.17
Pipe Crisis 41.88 65.07 68.65 
72.17 +30.28
Simulation
Tycoon Space Colony 36.88 64.60 69.15 
76.55 +39.67
Pirate Port 51.32 63.06 70.75 77.81 +26.48
Wildhaven 49.43 74.09 77.78 
80.39 +30.96
Idle Ant Empire 65.52 71.42 69.64 
87.88 +22.36
Factory Planet 75.16 78.94 82.27 
87.78 +12.63
Dungeon Guild 63.92 68.94 76.95 79.50 +15.57
Simulation Kitchen Rush 42.62 48.07 65.64 73.38 +30.75
Air Control 54.24 63.96 66.72 69.73 +15.50
Border Check 43.58 67.70 67.00 
72.74 +29.17
Adventure
Horror Floor 13 48.68 70.73 68.56 73.41 +24.73
Dollhouse 56.33 64.28 66.93 72.59 +16.27
Lighthouse 51.95 63.89 71.47 80.90 +28.95
Open World Sky Islands 53.25 47.19 60.91 68.25 +15.00
Airship Trader 59.58 73.60 74.40 74.41 +14.83
Bounty 47.00 67.47 63.31 68.27 +21.27
Visual Novel Detective Noir 47.46 63.15 55.54 65.31 +17.85
Arcane Academy 59.30 37.60 62.71 70.69 +11.39
Time Paradox 50.63 63.28 71.15 71.97 +21.34
Mean 49.58 59.71 64.84 71.52 +21.93
Table 15 | Complete GameCraft-Bench task scores for OpenCode + DeepSeek-V4-Pro. Scores use the bench-
mark’s 0–100 scale; Δ denotes HoH@3 minus Vanilla.
Family Task Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3 Δ
Action
Platformer Momentum Lab 14.33 23.13 32.92 
30.75 +16.42
Ivory Beats 31.73 45.78 42.09 61.08 +29.35
Thunder Valkyrie 19.37 28.65 52.20 60.54 +41.17
Shooter Void Patrol 37.12 57.44 53.49 57.77 +20.66
Wave Commander 14.74 2.31 35.61 
46.46 +31.71
Hotline Heist 33.85 12.78 33.42 38.05 +4.20
Roguelike Dungeon Shop 39.98 41.52 53.22 46.50 +6.52
Breach Tactics 35.28 23.77 36.76 46.99 +11.71
Void Harvest 9.50 14.34 49.29 52.83 +43.33
Timing
Racing Drift Circuit 37.87 31.48 39.17 38.69 +0.82
Rocket Trials 2.41 3.02 19.90 22.68 +20.27
Trick Runner 14.37 19.62 25.26 39.24 +24.86
Rhythm Note Highway 25.25 20.88 29.61 
40.34 +15.09
Beat Dungeon 3.06 18.60 17.05 
23.81 +20.74
Garden 49.29 58.11 55.21 
63.74 +14.44
Sports Skateboard Park 19.28 24.69 46.28 
57.60 +38.32
Boxing Gym 31.31 40.69 42.25 
55.75 +24.44
Archery Quest 33.57 29.50 54.31 63.62 +30.06
40

Table 15 (continued)
Family Task Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3 Δ
Strategy
Strategy Tower Defense 29.47 25.89 39.18 49.54 +20.07
Chess Variant 18.76 23.69 40.45 38.51 +19.75
Spell Tactics 15.03 35.17 21.57 
42.05 +27.02
Card Game Spire Descent 13.33 4.38 19.47 23.00 +9.67
Poker Roguelike 20.50 24.89 38.77 57.90 +37.40
Autobattler 30.76 18.75 23.12 
18.65 -12.12
Puzzle Sokoban Dungeon 34.27 33.67 51.95 
51.67 +17.40
Circuit Wizard 3.90 14.56 3.90 
35.84 +31.95
Pipe Crisis 25.39 14.55 63.17 72.90 +47.50
Simulation
Tycoon Space Colony 34.24 47.98 57.87 60.27 +26.03
Pirate Port 25.89 61.33 52.00 
52.16 +26.26
Wildhaven 47.66 46.52 55.13 66.07 +18.41
Idle Ant Empire 40.73 42.64 55.49 49.08 +8.36
Factory Planet 38.17 35.20 41.02 67.84 +29.66
Dungeon Guild 15.66 32.89 69.71 
61.34 +45.67
Simulation Kitchen Rush 33.31 33.41 36.44 39.96 +6.64
Air Control 28.23 35.40 33.49 35.30 +7.07
Border Check 70.22 58.34 69.22 70.74 +0.52
Adventure
Horror Floor 13 29.22 14.56 41.53 42.12 +12.90
Dollhouse 8.75 10.95 13.00 54.39 +45.64
Lighthouse 52.11 35.78 46.30 83.33 +31.23
Open World Sky Islands 24.37 11.87 28.69 46.51 +22.15
Airship Trader 38.94 35.41 54.64 62.37 +23.42
Bounty 7.09 13.66 0.73 25.35 +18.26
Visual Novel Detective Noir 22.22 18.06 56.59 61.57 +39.35
Arcane Academy 28.76 26.72 51.36 49.05 +20.29
Time Paradox 21.13 34.96 31.62 40.04 +18.91
Mean 26.90 28.61 40.32 48.98 +22.08
Table 16 | Complete GameCraft-Bench task scores for Pi + MiniMax-M3. Scores use the benchmark’s 0–100
scale; Δ denotes HoH@3 minus Vanilla.
Family Task Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3 Δ
Action
Platformer Momentum Lab 38.28 34.49 45.03 
48.80 +10.52
Ivory Beats 36.95 39.64 39.89 
42.23 +5.29
Thunder Valkyrie 60.52 50.14 61.74 64.71 +4.20
Shooter Void Patrol 56.14 67.37 66.21 76.66 +20.52
Wave Commander 69.66 64.54 72.85 75.52 +5.86
Hotline Heist 41.46 47.81 44.65 43.31 +1.84
Roguelike Dungeon Shop 25.08 40.12 47.16 
46.11 +21.02
Breach Tactics 33.70 43.79 53.61 59.56 +25.86
Void Harvest 48.96 67.37 61.15 67.28 +18.32
Timing
Racing Drift Circuit 36.91 59.79 55.68 
55.24 +18.33
Rocket Trials 35.50 38.21 37.33 
42.36 +6.86
Trick Runner 41.79 51.66 59.92 
59.50 +17.71
Rhythm Note Highway 10.35 39.65 54.91 
62.58 +52.23
Beat Dungeon 41.75 55.41 53.18 
64.83 +23.08
Garden 41.70 63.78 56.48 67.03 +25.33
41

Table 16 (continued)
Family Task Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3 Δ
Sports Skateboard Park 71.06 55.25 72.20 84.99 +13.92
Boxing Gym 40.44 55.00 57.71 60.53 +20.09
Archery Quest 24.25 51.31 61.23 61.85 +37.60
Strategy
Strategy Tower Defense 43.51 57.22 46.99 
55.98 +12.47
Chess Variant 24.75 31.46 27.15 30.88 +6.13
Spell Tactics 46.51 37.10 47.10 
53.93 +7.42
Card Game Spire Descent 26.61 18.09 10.96 
10.96 -15.65
Poker Roguelike 3.19 30.31 50.81 
49.78 +46.59
Autobattler 55.44 46.45 50.42 53.37 -2.07
Puzzle Sokoban Dungeon 41.98 59.80 61.21 57.66 +15.68
Circuit Wizard 15.50 31.61 46.89 53.51 +38.01
Pipe Crisis 53.26 35.39 39.39 
37.65 -15.61
Simulation
Tycoon Space Colony 62.72 51.54 55.76 
58.33 -4.39
Pirate Port 35.07 73.08 71.44 65.70 +30.63
Wildhaven 58.08 57.75 61.88 
65.75 +7.66
Idle Ant Empire 61.62 54.00 82.34 82.56 +20.94
Factory Planet 44.02 54.35 77.25 80.35 +36.33
Dungeon Guild 73.24 63.13 70.12 73.84 +0.60
Simulation Kitchen Rush 16.80 42.60 49.42 62.56 +45.76
Air Control 28.61 55.82 63.76 45.69 +17.08
Border Check 53.54 33.74 36.83 43.44 -10.10
Adventure
Horror Floor 13 57.29 35.94 59.74 66.60 +9.31
Dollhouse 35.53 55.12 67.94 71.90 +36.37
Lighthouse 60.00 76.82 73.41 74.72 +14.72
Open World Sky Islands 19.19 52.99 49.33 59.73 +40.54
Airship Trader 44.42 52.55 56.95 60.52 +16.10
Bounty 43.78 40.19 45.38 58.44 +14.66
Visual Novel Detective Noir 40.87 46.41 66.07 58.16 +17.29
Arcane Academy 51.85 42.98 45.88 65.71 +13.86
Time Paradox 45.44 45.99 61.56 64.22 +18.78
Mean 42.16 49.06 55.04 58.78 +16.62
C.2 FrontierSWE Per-Task Rewards
Figure 8 reports category means under the official FrontierSWE taxonomy. The unequal task counts
are shown explicitly on the horizontal axis.
42

Implementation
(n = 4)
Performance
(n = 9)
Research
(n = 2)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Mean reward
Codex + GPT-5.5 (high)
0.21 
0.17
1.15
0.30 
0.45
1.45
Implementation
(n = 4)
Performance
(n = 9)
Research
(n = 2)
OpenCode + DeepSeek-V4-Pro
0.08 
0.23
0.57
0.15 
0.27
0.79
Implementation
(n = 4)
Performance
(n = 9)
Research
(n = 2)
Pi + MiniMax-M3
0.06 
0.12
1.30
0.11
0.45
1.88
Vanilla HoH@3
Figure 8 | FrontierSWE mean rewards by official category and harness–model configuration.
Tables 17–19 report every FrontierSWE task and condition.
Table 17 | Complete FrontierSWE task rewards for Codex + GPT-5.5 (high).
Task Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3
Implementation
Dart Style Haskell 0.00 0.06 0.07 0.16
Git to Zig 0.18 0.18 0.17 0.18
Lua Native Compiler 0.52 0.60 0.72 0.70
PostgreSQL–SQLite Wire Adapter 0.14 0.15 0.15 0.15
Performance
Cranelift Codegen Optimization 0.00 0.00 0.00 
0.00
Dependent Type Checker 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
FFmpeg Swscale Rewrite 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Granite Mamba2 Inference Optimization 0.20 1.01 1.07 1.02
Inference System Optimization 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Libexpat to x86 Assembly 0.20 0.20 0.21 0.21
Notebook Compression 0.00 0.69 0.69 0.69
Pyright Type-Checking Optimization 1.16 1.11 1.17 1.16
Revideo Performance Optimization 0.00 0.91 0.91 0.99
Research
Optimizer Design 1.40 1.71 1.46 
2.00
PCQM4Mv2 Autoresearch 0.90 0.89 0.89 0.89
Mean 0.31 0.50 0.50 0.54
Table 18 | Complete FrontierSWE task rewards for OpenCode + DeepSeek-V4-Pro.
Task Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3
Implementation
Dart Style Haskell 0.02 0.04 0.05 0.04
Git to Zig 0.13 0.17 0.17 0.17
Lua Native Compiler 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.25
PostgreSQL–SQLite Wire Adapter 0.15 0.14 0.15 0.15
Performance
Cranelift Codegen Optimization 0.00 0.00 0.00 
0.00
Dependent Type Checker 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
FFmpeg Swscale Rewrite 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Granite Mamba2 Inference Optimization 0.20 0.19 0.21 
0.20
Inference System Optimization 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Libexpat to x86 Assembly 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
43

Table 18 (continued)
Task Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3
Notebook Compression 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Pyright Type-Checking Optimization 1.04 1.17 1.30 
1.29
Revideo Performance Optimization 0.80 0.75 0.92 0.95
Research
Optimizer Design 1.14 1.55 1.55 1.57
PCQM4Mv2 Autoresearch 0.00 0.00 0.00 
0.00
Mean 0.23 0.27 0.29 0.31
Table 19 | Complete FrontierSWE task rewards for Pi + MiniMax-M3.
Task Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3
Implementation
Dart Style Haskell 0.12 0.04 0.06 0.07
Git to Zig 0.00 0.19 0.19 0.19
Lua Native Compiler 0.00 0.03 0.03 
0.03
PostgreSQL–SQLite Wire Adapter 0.13 0.15 0.15 0.15
Performance
Cranelift Codegen Optimization 0.00 0.00 0.00 
0.00
Dependent Type Checker 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
FFmpeg Swscale Rewrite 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Granite Mamba2 Inference Optimization 1.06 1.97 1.98 2.18
Inference System Optimization 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Libexpat to x86 Assembly 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Notebook Compression 0.00 0.67 0.67 0.67
Pyright Type-Checking Optimization 0.00 1.18 1.18 1.17
Revideo Performance Optimization 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Research
Optimizer Design 2.60 2.90 2.90 
2.87
PCQM4Mv2 Autoresearch 0.00 0.88 0.88 0.88
Mean 0.26 0.53 0.54 0.55
C.3 Budget-Controlled Comparison
The pass-controlled experiment uses Codex with GPT-5.5 (high) on the same 45 GameCraft-Bench
tasks under the protocol in Section B.5. HoH uses three complete planning–coding–testing iterations.
Figure 9 shows how artifact quality and cumulative token use change over the three development
passes.
1 2 3
Development passes
50
60
70
Overall score
Artifact quality
1 2 3
Development passes
0
2
4
6
8
Cumulative tokens (M)
 
Inference use
Vanilla Continuation HoH
Figure 9 | Score and cumulative token trajectories in the budget-controlled GameCraft-Bench comparison
using Codex with GPT-5.5 (high). HoH includes planning, coding, and testing at each pass.
44

Tables 20 and 21 report the task-level scores and cumulative coding-harness tokens, respectively.
Averaged over the 45 tasks, Vanilla, three-pass Vanilla Continuation, and HoH obtain scores of 49.58,
58.24, and 71.52 using 2.59M, 6.33M, and 8.41M tokens per task, respectively. By Eq. 12, the three-
pass conditions gain 2.32 and 3.77 score points per additional million tokens for Vanilla Continuation
and HoH, respectively.
Table 20 | Task-level scores for the budget-controlled comparison on GameCraft-Bench using Codex + GPT-5.5
(high).
Task Vanilla Vanilla Cont.@2 Vanilla Cont.@3 HoH@3
Action
Ivory Beats 46.81 44.58 44.84 85.42
Momentum Lab 34.05 44.51 41.15 70.61
Thunder Valkyrie 53.51 53.44 66.41 
73.67
Hotline Heist 43.37 41.70 44.21 62.81
Void Patrol 58.59 74.05 72.66 
87.83
Wave Commander 66.97 69.79 63.52 75.25
Void Harvest 41.05 41.06 40.60 57.43
Breach Tactics 53.44 54.04 55.93 61.09
Dungeon Shop 40.89 41.59 41.09 65.09
Timing
Drift Circuit 43.58 41.72 63.77 70.08
Rocket Trials 45.19 43.81 49.82 70.31
Trick Runner 51.50 48.38 53.64 64.78
Beat Dungeon 47.94 46.70 50.41 60.81
Garden 52.75 56.44 58.62 70.69
Note Highway 39.44 40.84 44.28 64.68
Archery Quest 58.09 66.64 72.67 
76.69
Boxing Gym 43.07 52.75 56.44 73.14
Skateboard Park 57.64 68.37 67.47 81.14
Strategy
Chess Variant 30.04 32.89 32.46 59.72
Spell Tactics 53.10 52.98 52.75 63.32
Tower Defense 58.85 69.76 71.02 76.92
Autobattler 55.06 63.80 59.77 72.22
Poker Roguelike 44.66 48.69 51.48 69.27
Spire Descent 25.85 41.60 55.81 61.92
Circuit Wizard 31.35 34.47 36.78 
49.52
Pipe Crisis 41.88 39.64 45.39 72.17
Sokoban Dungeon 55.75 65.11 67.14 70.13
Simulation
Pirate Port 51.32 48.05 72.20 
77.81
Space Colony 36.87 43.97 45.09 
76.55
Wildhaven 49.42 60.30 64.68 80.39
Ant Empire 65.52 81.58 85.84 87.88
Dungeon Guild 63.92 72.76 75.41 79.50
Factory Planet 75.16 79.27 80.69 87.78
Air Control 54.24 44.85 55.18 69.73
Border Check 43.57 69.05 69.45 72.74
Kitchen Rush 42.62 58.57 54.23 73.38
Adventure
Dollhouse 56.33 64.55 70.36 72.59
Floor 13 48.68 65.44 66.90 
73.41
Lighthouse 51.95 69.16 72.70 
80.90
Airship Trader 59.58 67.71 65.15 74.41
Bounty 47.00 51.46 54.09 68.27
Sky Islands 53.25 61.56 63.38 
68.25
Arcane Academy 59.30 54.02 52.10 70.69
45

Table 20 (continued)
Task Vanilla Vanilla Cont.@2 Vanilla Cont.@3 HoH@3
Detective Noir 47.46 45.40 51.15 65.31
Time Paradox 50.63 57.48 61.92 
71.97
Mean 49.58 54.99 58.24 71.52
Table 21 | Task-level cumulative token usage (M) for the budget-controlled comparison on GameCraft-Bench
using Codex + GPT-5.5 (high).
Task Vanilla Vanilla Cont.@2 Vanilla Cont.@3 HoH@3
Action
Ivory Beats 1.49 2.32 3.17 
5.64
Momentum Lab 2.27 5.07 8.13 9.00
Thunder Valkyrie 1.86 4.96 6.61 
8.27
Hotline Heist 1.41 2.28 3.70 7.68
Void Patrol 2.42 4.21 6.39 
6.55
Wave Commander 2.61 4.66 5.82 
9.37
Void Harvest 2.75 4.62 6.37 8.50
Breach Tactics 2.43 4.50 8.46 7.54
Dungeon Shop 2.53 4.99 6.33 6.31
Timing
Drift Circuit 2.20 6.18 8.22 9.16
Rocket Trials 1.92 4.55 5.90 
10.01
Trick Runner 4.13 5.83 7.68 7.65
Beat Dungeon 1.85 3.20 4.31 6.84
Garden 4.57 6.08 7.59 9.65
Note Highway 2.73 5.26 9.05 6.19
Archery Quest 1.51 5.62 7.24 11.16
Boxing Gym 3.25 5.19 6.55 7.82
Skateboard Park 2.41 3.31 4.44 7.63
Strategy
Chess Variant 1.77 2.48 5.00 9.13
Spell Tactics 2.22 3.83 5.71 
7.37
Tower Defense 2.12 3.77 6.12 11.85
Autobattler 2.74 4.74 6.16 10.83
Poker Roguelike 3.41 7.13 9.29 7.35
Spire Descent 2.31 4.16 6.11 11.51
Circuit Wizard 2.06 4.13 6.70 7.01
Pipe Crisis 1.73 3.33 4.27 5.97
Sokoban Dungeon 1.30 2.67 3.88 6.27
Simulation
Pirate Port 2.43 3.32 5.81 6.69
Space Colony 4.79 6.72 9.04 
9.27
Wildhaven 2.58 4.01 5.22 9.93
Ant Empire 3.11 4.87 6.38 11.02
Dungeon Guild 2.41 6.81 9.33 9.28
Factory Planet 3.75 6.30 7.23 9.15
Air Control 3.25 5.32 7.38 
7.97
Border Check 1.52 3.34 4.92 7.30
Kitchen Rush 2.36 4.19 5.18 8.98
Adventure
Dollhouse 1.20 2.22 3.61 8.10
Floor 13 1.68 3.25 4.90 5.81
Lighthouse 2.91 4.25 6.07 8.24
Airship Trader 1.92 3.58 4.78 7.34
Bounty 4.18 7.97 9.94 
8.32
46

Table 21 (continued)
Task Vanilla Vanilla Cont.@2 Vanilla Cont.@3 HoH@3
Sky Islands 3.60 4.78 5.72 15.71
Arcane Academy 3.59 5.39 7.70 
6.56
Detective Noir 3.69 4.09 4.86 8.04
Time Paradox 3.68 5.91 7.53 
8.23
Mean 2.59 4.56 6.33 8.41
C.4 Ablation Study
We evaluate three variants of HoH with 𝑇 = 3 on all 45 GameCraft-Bench tasks using Codex with
GPT-5.5 (high), following the interventions in Section B.6. The complete task-level scores are reported
in Table 22. Aggregate token usage is reported separately in Table 23. The mean score decreases
from 71.52 for full HoH to 63.39 without plan update, 65.23 without evidence feedback, and 63.67
without artifact warm-start. Figure 10 places the score changes beside their cumulative token use.
w/o Plan
Update
w/o Evidence
Feedback
w/o Warm-
Start
Full HoH
55
60
65
70
75
Overall score
Final artifact quality
w/o Plan
Update
w/o Evidence
Feedback
w/o Warm-
Start
Full HoH
0
5
10
Cumulative tokens (M)
 
Inference use
Figure 10 | Final score and cumulative token use for full HoH and the three cross-iteration ablations on
GameCraft-Bench.
Table 22 | Task-level GameCraft-Bench ablation scores using Codex + GPT-5.5 (high), with 𝑇 = 3. All values
use the benchmark’s 0–100 scale.
Task Full HoH
w/o
Plan Update
w/o
Evidence Feedback
w/o
Warm-Start
Action
Momentum Lab 70.61 67.81 56.67 58.77
Ivory Beats 85.42 69.42 80.33 78.85
Thunder Valkyrie 73.67 69.99 72.94 72.51
Void Patrol 87.83 73.22 77.79 72.05
Wave Commander 75.25 68.74 73.28 68.31
Hotline Heist 62.81 52.40 58.24 35.21
Dungeon Shop 
65.09 57.73 59.33 64.00
Breach Tactics 61.09 58.73 53.49 52.89
Void Harvest 57.43 53.96 52.46 53.04
Timing
Drift Circuit 70.08 63.19 66.85 52.81
Rocket Trials 70.31 63.56 68.15 64.09
Trick Runner 64.78 62.55 62.45 57.59
Note Highway 64.68 63.84 61.32 64.51
Beat Dungeon 
60.81 58.38 57.50 50.84
Garden 70.69 65.61 64.19 67.89
Skateboard Park 81.14 75.77 75.24 77.44
Boxing Gym 73.14 47.90 43.73 71.16
47

Table 22 (continued)
Task Full HoH
w/o
Plan Update
w/o
Evidence Feedback
w/o
Warm-Start
Archery Quest 76.69 66.11 72.52 65.61
Strategy
Tower Defense 76.92 68.56 63.55 51.71
Chess Variant 
59.72 57.91 47.87 51.58
Spell Tactics 63.32 50.70 58.73 58.81
Spire Descent 
61.92 46.15 60.31 60.21
Poker Roguelike 69.27 64.70 64.11 58.89
Autobattler 
72.22 68.39 71.42 56.35
Sokoban Dungeon 70.13 57.02 68.60 64.19
Circuit Wizard 
49.52 39.38 35.48 40.11
Pipe Crisis 72.17 62.00 61.94 46.91
Simulation
Space Colony 
76.55 57.86 75.17 75.14
Pirate Port 77.81 75.55 70.51 76.69
Wildhaven 
80.39 79.00 79.12 75.22
Ant Empire 87.88 78.05 82.11 80.69
Factory Planet 87.78 70.69 83.21 84.36
Dungeon Guild 79.50 67.98 73.23 76.10
Kitchen Rush 73.38 57.69 60.10 56.94
Air Control 69.73 63.84 66.51 64.92
Border Check 72.74 65.41 62.44 61.16
Adventure
Floor 13 73.41 68.94 69.89 63.37
Dollhouse 72.59 60.84 60.38 67.71
Lighthouse 80.90 72.72 74.72 81.50
Sky Islands 68.25 62.50 63.07 59.85
Airship Trader 
74.41 61.49 69.94 71.21
Bounty 68.27 67.41 68.20 64.57
Detective Noir 65.31 57.41 51.77 60.54
Arcane Academy 70.69 64.35 67.72 57.91
Time Paradox 71.97 67.02 68.91 70.96
Mean 71.52 63.39 65.23 63.67
Table 23 | Mean cumulative coding-harness tokens per task for the GameCraft-Bench ablation variants.
Variant Tokens (M)
w/o Plan Update 7.56
w/o Evidence Feedback 7.46
w/o Warm-Start 11.12
Full HoH 8.41
C.5 Resource Usage
Figure 11 shows the distribution of tokens used by each invocation on the 45 GameCraft-Bench tasks.
The panels retain the native provider accounting for each harness–model configuration and should
therefore be compared within, rather than across, panels.
48

Vanilla
HoH@1HoH@2HoH@3
2
4
6
8
Tokens per invocation (M)
 
Codex + GPT-5.5 (high)
Vanilla
HoH@1HoH@2HoH@3
5
10
15
Tokens per invocation (M)
 
OpenCode + DeepSeek-V4-Pro
Vanilla
HoH@1HoH@2HoH@3
0
25
50
75
100
Tokens per invocation (M)
 
Pi + MiniMax-M3
Figure 11 | Per-invocation coding-harness token distributions on GameCraft-Bench. Points denote tasks; boxes
show the median and interquartile range.
Table 24 aggregates the recorded resource use for the FrontierSWE runs.
Table 24 | Aggregate FrontierSWE resource usage.
Harness–model Vanilla HoH@1 HoH@2 HoH@3
Tokens Time Tokens Time Tokens Time Tokens Time
(M) (h) (M) (h) (M) (h) (M) (h)
Codex + GPT-5.5 (high) 103.43 18.65 109.26 14.32 83.19 13.21 71.71 10.28
OpenCode + DeepSeek-V4-Pro 384.84 32.00 332.61 23.58 345.66 23.32 229.77 16.16
Pi + MiniMax-M3 541.73 40.19 1117.11 49.05 988.00 21.53 717.69 37.15
49

D Qualitative Analysis
Figures 12–16 show one representative game from each of the 15 GameCraft-Bench families. For
each family, we select the game with the highest HoH@3 Overall score under Codex with GPT-5.5
(high). Each row compares Vanilla and HoH@1–3; the values beneath each artifact report Overall,
Core Mechanics (M), Content Depth (D), Functional Visuals (V), and Art and Presentation (A).
Ivory Beats
Platformer
Overall 46.8
M 50.0 D 45.0 V 49.2 A 46.2
Vanilla
Overall 73.3
M 85.0 D 65.0 V 83.4 A 72.2
HoH@1
Overall 78.6
M 92.0 D 82.0 V 80.4 A 68.5
HoH@2
Overall 85.4
M 91.0 D 86.0 V 94.1 A 78.8
HoH@3
Void Patrol
Shooter
Overall 58.6
M 90.0 D 50.0 V 65.8 A 50.6 
Overall 73.9
M 93.0 D 64.0 V 75.3 A 75.0 
Overall 76.0
M 100.0 D 66.0 V 77.2 A 75.2 
Overall 87.8
M 97.0 D 90.0 V 89.5 A 81.0
Dungeon Shop
Roguelike
Overall 40.9
M 52.0 D 48.0 V 44.5 A 27.5 
Overall 50.6
M 74.0 D 42.0 V 70.2 A 40.6 
Overall 50.1
M 74.0 D 43.0 V 70.0 A 38.6 
Overall 65.1
M 82.0 D 53.0 V 82.8 A 62.4
Figure 12 | Action: Platformer, Shooter, and Roguelike.
Rocket Trials
Racing
Overall 45.2
M 50.0 D 47.5 V 47.7 A 39.8
Vanilla
Overall 61.3
M 90.0 D 38.8 V 61.0 A 71.8
HoH@1
Overall 68.0
M 80.0 D 62.5 V 66.1 A 69.2
HoH@2
Overall 70.3
M 76.7 D 66.2 V 66.4 A 73.3
HoH@3
Garden
Rhythm
Overall 52.8
M 66.7 D 47.5 V 51.7 A 52.5 
Overall 65.3
M 81.7 D 63.7 V 50.6 A 66.2 
Overall 69.0
M 90.0 D 66.2 V 54.5 A 69.0 
Overall 70.7
M 100.0 D 68.8 V 52.5 A 67.9
Skateboard Park
Sports
Overall 57.6
M 75.0 D 60.0 V 30.0 A 59.7 
Overall 69.5
M 73.3 D 70.0 V 67.5 A 68.2 
Overall 72.6
M 76.7 D 76.2 V 75.0 A 66.2 
Overall 81.1
M 90.0 D 85.0 V 80.0 A 74.0
Figure 13 | Timing: Racing, Rhythm, and Sports.
50

Tower Defense
Strategy
Overall 58.8
M 65.0 D 67.5 V 67.8 A 43.8
Vanilla
Overall 64.0
M 67.5 D 66.2 V 80.8 A 53.0
HoH@1
Overall 64.1
M 67.5 D 70.0 V 77.1 A 51.2
HoH@2
Overall 76.9
M 73.8 D 75.0 V 90.2 A 74.5
HoH@3
Autobattler
Card Game
Overall 55.1
M 75.0 D 65.0 V 44.2 A 41.2 
Overall 72.4
M 86.7 D 76.2 V 61.7 A 67.0 
Overall 71.3
M 86.7 D 80.0 V 49.7 A 65.2 
Overall 72.2
M 91.7 D 75.0 V 61.7 A 65.6
Pipe Crisis
Puzzle
Overall 41.9
M 50.0 D 36.2 V 55.8 A 38.1 
Overall 65.1
M 86.2 D 48.8 V 81.3 A 65.3 
Overall 68.7
M 92.5 D 58.8 V 79.8 A 63.6 
Overall 72.2
M 100.0 D 60.0 V 81.7 A 68.3
Figure 14 | Strategy: Strategy, Card Game, and Puzzle.
Wildhaven
Tycoon
Overall 49.4
M 52.0 D 44.2 V 73.3 A 43.3
Vanilla
Overall 74.1
M 91.0 D 72.5 V 85.0 A 63.8
HoH@1
Overall 77.8
M 89.0 D 81.7 V 91.7 A 63.1
HoH@2
Overall 80.4
M 90.0 D 87.5 V 95.0 A 62.9
HoH@3
Ant Empire
Idle
Overall 65.5
M 93.3 D 68.8 V 35.0 A 63.4 
Overall 71.4
M 100.0 D 63.7 V 57.5 A 72.8 
Overall 69.6
M 96.7 D 67.5 V 45.0 A 70.8 
Overall 87.9
M 100.0 D 85.0 V 92.5 A 83.6
Kitchen Rush
Simulation
Overall 42.6
M 67.0 D 42.0 V 40.0 A 33.9 
Overall 48.1
M 73.0 D 49.0 V 47.8 A 36.6 
Overall 65.6
M 90.0 D 68.0 V 65.2 A 53.0 
Overall 73.4
M 100.0 D 72.0 V 72.9 A 63.5
Figure 15 | Simulation: Tycoon, Idle, and Simulation.
51

Lighthouse
Horror
Overall 51.9
M 61.7 D 65.0 V 35.0 A 42.0
Vanilla
Overall 63.9
M 65.0 D 63.7 V 50.0 A 69.5
HoH@1
Overall 71.5
M 78.3 D 75.0 V 57.5 A 71.0
HoH@2
Overall 80.9
M 86.7 D 86.2 V 70.0 A 77.8
HoH@3
Airship Trader
Open World
Overall 59.6
M 73.3 D 48.8 V 45.0 A 70.8 
Overall 73.6
M 90.0 D 67.5 V 95.0 A 63.5 
Overall 74.4
M 90.0 D 70.0 V 90.0 A 65.4 
Overall 74.4
M 95.0 D 70.0 V 87.5 A 64.4
Time Paradox
Visual Novel
Overall 50.6
M 77.0 D 60.0 V 40.3 A 34.4 
Overall 63.3
M 77.0 D 64.0 V 60.6 A 57.8 
Overall 71.2
M 79.0 D 70.0 V 77.9 A 66.0 
Overall 72.0
M 90.0 D 66.0 V 86.6 A 63.9
Figure 16 | Adventure: Horror, Open World, and Visual Novel.
Table 25 reports the exact Overall and dimension scores underlying all 60 artifacts shown above.
Table 25 | Scores for the 15 GameCraft-Bench games shown in the qualitative comparison. One game is
selected per benchmark family by the highest HoH@3 Overall score under Codex with GPT-5.5 (high).
Family Game Condition Overall Mechanics Depth Visuals Art
Action
Platformer Ivory Beats
Vanilla 46.81 50.00 45.00 49.17 46.25
HoH@1 73.28 85.00 65.00 83.44 72.19
HoH@2 78.55 92.00 82.00 80.42 68.54
HoH@3 85.42 91.00 86.00 94.06 78.75
Shooter Void Patrol
Vanilla 58.59 90.00 50.00 65.83 50.62
HoH@1 73.90 93.00 64.00 75.31 75.00
HoH@2 76.02 100.00 66.00 77.25 75.25
HoH@3 87.83 97.00 90.00 89.50 81.00
Roguelike Dungeon Shop
Vanilla 40.89 52.00 48.00 44.46 27.50
HoH@1 50.55 74.00 42.00 70.21 40.62
HoH@2 50.15 74.00 43.00 70.00 38.57
HoH@3 65.09 82.00 53.00 82.75 62.38
Timing
Racing Rocket Trials
Vanilla 45.19 50.00 47.50 47.67 39.75
HoH@1 61.33 90.00 38.75 61.00 71.75
HoH@2 68.00 80.00 62.50 66.11 69.17
HoH@3 70.31 76.67 66.25 66.39 73.33
Rhythm Garden
Vanilla 52.75 66.67 47.50 51.67 52.50
HoH@1 65.33 81.67 63.75 50.56 66.25
HoH@2 69.01 90.00 66.25 54.50 69.00
HoH@3 70.69 100.00 68.75 52.50 67.88
Sports Skateboard Park
Vanilla 57.64 75.00 60.00 30.00 59.69
HoH@1 69.51 73.33 70.00 67.50 68.25
HoH@2 72.62 76.67 76.25 75.00 66.25
HoH@3 81.14 90.00 85.00 80.00 73.96
52

Table 25 (continued)
Family Game Condition Overall Mechanics Depth Visuals Art
Strategy
Strategy Tower Defense
Vanilla 58.85 65.00 67.50 67.75 43.75
HoH@1 63.97 67.50 66.25 80.75 53.00
HoH@2 64.12 67.50 70.00 77.08 51.25
HoH@3 76.92 73.75 75.00 90.25 74.50
Card Game Autobattler
Vanilla 55.06 75.00 65.00 44.17 41.25
HoH@1 72.39 86.67 76.25 61.67 67.00
HoH@2 71.28 86.67 80.00 49.72 65.21
HoH@3 72.22 91.67 75.00 61.67 65.62
Puzzle Pipe Crisis
Vanilla 41.88 50.00 36.25 55.83 38.06
HoH@1 65.07 86.25 48.75 81.33 65.33
HoH@2 68.65 92.50 58.75 79.76 63.57
HoH@3 72.17 100.00 60.00 81.67 68.33
Simulation
Tycoon Wildhaven
Vanilla 49.42 52.00 44.17 73.33 43.33
HoH@1 74.09 91.00 72.50 85.00 63.75
HoH@2 77.78 89.00 81.67 91.67 63.12
HoH@3 80.39 90.00 87.50 95.00 62.89
Idle Ant Empire
Vanilla 65.52 93.33 68.75 35.00 63.44
HoH@1 71.42 100.00 63.75 57.50 72.81
HoH@2 69.64 96.67 67.50 45.00 70.75
HoH@3 87.88 100.00 85.00 92.50 83.57
Simulation Kitchen Rush
Vanilla 42.62 67.00 42.00 40.00 33.93
HoH@1 48.07 73.00 49.00 47.81 36.56
HoH@2 65.64 90.00 68.00 65.25 53.00
HoH@3 73.38 100.00 72.00 72.92 63.54
Adventure
Horror Lighthouse
Vanilla 51.95 61.67 65.00 35.00 42.00
HoH@1 63.89 65.00 63.75 50.00 69.50
HoH@2 71.47 78.33 75.00 57.50 71.00
HoH@3 80.90 86.67 86.25 70.00 77.75
Open World Airship Trader
Vanilla 59.58 73.33 48.75 45.00 70.75
HoH@1 73.60 90.00 67.50 95.00 63.50
HoH@2 74.40 90.00 70.00 90.00 65.42
HoH@3 74.41 95.00 70.00 87.50 64.38
Visual Novel Time Paradox
Vanilla 50.63 77.00 60.00 40.31 34.38
HoH@1 63.28 77.00 64.00 60.62 57.81
HoH@2 71.15 79.00 70.00 77.92 66.04
HoH@3 71.97 90.00 66.00 86.61 63.93
53
