alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2608.05604

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable
Agent Skill Libraries
Xingyu Tan
UNSW & CSIRO
Sydney, Australia
xingyu.tan@unsw.edu.au
Xiaoyang Wang
UNSW
Sydney, Australia
xiaoyang.wang1@unsw.edu.au
Qing Liu
CSIRO
Hobart, Australia
q.liu@csiro.au
Xiwei Xu
CSIRO
Sydney, Australia
xiwei.xu@csiro.au
Xin Yuan
CSIRO & UNSW
Sydney, Australia
xin.yuan@csiro.au
Liming Zhu
CSIRO
Sydney, Australia
liming.zhu@csiro.au
Wenjie Zhang
UNSW
Sydney, Australia
wenjie.zhang@unsw.edu.au
ABSTRACT
Large Language Models (LLMs) increasingly act as agents whose
procedural knowledge is stored in reusable skill packages and
loaded at inference time. As skill libraries grow, a central chal-
lenge is to expose the smallest sufficient executable context under a
limited context budget. Existing systems struggle to reuse routines
below the whole-skill level, preserve procedural contracts during
compression, keep compressed routines executable and expandable,
and update the compressed library as skills evolve. These challenges
reveal a unit mismatch: skills are retrieved as packages, compressed
as text, and converted into execution graphs only after retrieval,
whereas reliable reuse requires a contract-bearing procedural unit.
We propose SkillZip, an execution-aware procedural abstraction
framework that performs contract-preserving compression over
section-level graphs. SkillZip rewrites recurring contract-valid mo-
tifs into reversible ported macros while preserving boundary sig-
natures, dependency closure, verifier reachability, and source-level
expansion. At inference time, it hydrates a compact, dependency-
closed context and expands macros only when required. ReZip
further integrates new skills and revises risky macros using ex-
ecution evidence. Comprehensive experiments on technical and
embodied agent benchmarks show SkillZip consistently outper-
forms the strongest baseline by up to 12.2 points, while achieving a
3.46× compression ratio with 99.2% dependency preservation and
98.7% verifier reachability. Scaling analyses further confirm robust
retrieval across skill libraries ranging from 200 to 100K skills.
KEYWORDS
LLM Agents, Agent Skills, Procedural Memory, Graph Compression,
Skill Retrieval
1 INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used as agents
that interact with tools and environments [34, 53]. In these set-
tings, task success often depends on procedural rather than factual
knowledge, such as how to normalize a spreadsheet or verify that
an artifact is correct. Agent skills have therefore emerged as an
external procedural memory layer for LLM agents [20, 51]. A skill
package stores instructions, supporting resources, and rules for
execution and verification in an editable artifact loaded at inference
Mismatch: Preservation of text
meaning, not explicit execution.
Risks hiding verifiers or checks.
Mismatch: Loading full instruction
list and resources for small task.
(a): Coarse-Grained Skill Exposure
[Challenge 1]: Reuse-granularity mismatch.
Query &
Selection
Coarse
metadata
matching
Exposed Unit:
Whole Skill Package
(b): Text-Based Skill Compression
[Challenge 2]: Contract preservation under compression.
(Rewrite or
Summarize)
Text
Summarization
[Challenge 3]: Persistent executable compression (Graphs built only for tasks).
Skill Library
After retrieval as
whole packages.
Task-time graph
compilation
Execution Graph
Section-level unit, contract preservation, execution-aware maintenance.
Step List
Compressed Text
Representation
Skill B
Skill C
Skill A
Skill E
Skill F
Skill D
(c): Post-Retrieval Graph Compilation
Skill Library
Intent Input
Steps
Pivot Table
Chart
...
Clean CSV
...
Mismatch: Library is
document-based; graphs
are constructed after
retrieval and never
persisted. Library
remains unoptimized.
Unit: Section-Level
Procedural Graph Node
PathHydrate
(d): SkillZip: Section-Level Unified Graph Workflow
Unified
Procedural
Graph
MotifZip Compression
Op
Verify
Macro
1.Task
Anchoring 
2.Select
Context
3.Expand
as Needed 
4.Hydration
& Rendering
Update Compressed Graph & Macro Dictionary
Intent
Precondition
Op
Verifier 
Resource
Op
Skill X
Intent
Precondition
Op
Verifier
Output
...
Executor
New
Skills 
Execution
Traces
ReZip
Maintenance
Match & Reuse
Existing Macros
Promote Demote
Section-Level Unit
Task: Normalize headers and check row counts ...
Clean CSV
Intent Input
Steps 
...
Pivot Table
Skill Library
Intent Input
Steps
Pivot Table
Chart
...
Clean CSV
...
...
Step 1: Normalized
headers using logic X,
Y, Z . . .
Step 2: . . .
Macro
Intent
Figure 1: Representative skill-library workflows.
time [51], allowing procedures to change without retraining. At in-
ference time, a skill provider selects task-relevant procedures from
the library and exposes them to the agent. As the library grows, the
provider must distinguish among more overlapping packages while
avoiding incomplete or redundant context. This raises a central
question. How can a skill provider retrieve and expose the smallest
sufficient executable context within a tight context budget?
Existing solutions retrieve each skill package as a whole. How-
ever, a skill is not an atomic text unit, but a collection of functional
sections such as intents, operations, verifiers, and outputs. A system
should therefore retrieve the smallest execution-complete subset
rather than read every relevant skill from beginning to end. To-
gether with their typed dependencies and verifier hooks, they define
the skill’s procedural contract: what the procedure exposes, how
it executes, and how its effects are verified. This issue becomes
more pronounced when a task requires multiple skills, since their
useful procedures may overlap. For example, skills of Clean CSV
and Pivot Tables may share schema inference, header normaliza-
tion, and row-count validation, while differing in their downstream
operations and verifiers. Instead of repeatedly loading each full
1
arXiv:2608.05604v1 [cs.CL] 6 Aug 2026

Xingyu Tan et al.
package, the system should retrieve the shared contract-compatible
procedure once and add only the task-specific sections.
Challenges in existing methods. Most existing skill-library sys-
tems can be viewed as following a “retrieve-compress-execute”
pipeline. In this paradigm, an agent first retrieves relevant skill
packages or metadata, optionally compresses the selected skill con-
tent to reduce prompt cost, and then builds a task-time execution
context or graph for the selected skills. While this improves modu-
larity and token efficiency, several challenges remain.
Challenge 1: Reuse-granularity mismatch. Existing progressive-
disclosure and skill-graph systems [24, 51, 54], as shown in Fig-
ure 1(a), use the whole skill as the retrieval unit. They reduce the
number of packages loaded, but cannot select only the relevant
procedure within each package. For example, a query to normalize
headers and verify row counts matches both the Clean CSV and
Pivot Table skills because they contain the same routine. A skill-level
retriever therefore loads both packages, although the task needs
only their shared sections. Retrieving this routine at the section
level instead avoids unrelated downstream operations, reducing
both excess context and ambiguity between overlapping skills. This
ambiguity compounds as the library grows, because every overlap-
ping package enters retrieval as another coarse candidate.
Challenge 2: Contract preservation under compression. Current
skill-compression methods [8, 44, 50], as shown in Figure 1(b),
shorten skills by rewriting, debloating, or encoding their content
into compact text or sequence representations. These methods
optimize the token budget directly, but their preserved structure
is mainly textual or latent, rather than an explicit procedural
contract. For executable skills, textual closeness does not imply
contract equivalence: a compressed skill can stay close to the
original wording while obscuring a precondition, guard branch,
or verifier hook. For example, the two relevant skills above
contain near-identical loading routines that feed different verifiers;
compressing them as similar spans can blur incompatible checks
and make the resulting procedure unsafe to execute.
Challenge 3: Persistent executable compression. Some task-time
execution-graph systems [1, 17, 24], as shown in Figure 1(c), or-
ganize already selected skills into explicit procedural graphs and
support verification or repair during execution. However, these
graphs are built after retrieval, over skills that have already been
selected, so the library itself is not stored as a persistent compressed
structure. As a result, the recurring loading-and-validation routine
is re-discovered and re-verified on every task that touches it, rather
than compressed into the units later trusted by execution.
Challenge 4: Execution-aware maintenance. Skill libraries are not
static because new skills reveal recurring procedures, while execu-
tion traces reveal which abstractions are reliable or risky [28, 31].
A one-shot compressor can neither recognize a routine that be-
comes reusable only after later skills arrive nor revise a macro
that repeatedly triggers expansion, verifier failure, or downstream
repair. For example, later spreadsheet skills may establish period
alignment and balance checking as a reusable routine, whereas
formula-bearing tasks may expose a generic export macro that
lacks a required verifier. Compression should therefore be main-
tained as the library grows and as execution evidence accumulates.
These challenges reveal a common unit mismatch. Current skill
provider systems retrieve whole skill packages, compress skill text,
and build execution graphs only after retrieval, i.e., three decisions
made over three different units. For agent skills, they should target
the same object: a contract-bearing section subgraph whose proce-
dural contract survives retrieval, compression, and execution alike.
We call a compression contract-preserving if it shortens a routine
while retaining the interface, execution, and verification aspects of
this contract. Source pointers are preserved separately so that the
routine can be expanded back to its original sections when needed.
Contribution. In this paper, we introduce SkillZip, a contract-
preserving graph compression framework for scalable agent skill
libraries as shown in Figure 1(d). SkillZip changes the basic represen-
tation unit from whole skill packages to source-grounded, contract-
bearing section-level unit connected by procedural dependencies.
Over this unified representation, SkillZip performs execution-
aware procedural abstraction through contract-preserving com-
pression, i.e., recurring subgraphs are rewritten as reusable macros
only when their procedural contracts remain explicit and recover-
able. The resulting graph provides a common basis for exposing
reusable routines and hydrating task-specific executable context.
To address reuse-granularity mismatch, SkillZip performs Sec2-
Graph, which opens each skill package into source-grounded sec-
tion nodes. It represents functional sections with distinct execu-
tion roles (e.g., intents, inputs, operations, verifiers, and output) as
reusable procedural units, making internal skill components visible
without manually splitting the skill library.
To preserve procedural contracts under compression, SkillZip in-
troduces MotifZip, a contract-preserving compressor that mines
recurring section-level motifs and promotes them into ported macro
nodes only when their boundary signatures, dependency closure,
verifier reachability, and source expansion are preserved. Each
macro is therefore a reversible rewrite instead of a lossy summary.
To make compressed routines executable and expandable, Skil-
lZip employs PathHydrate, which routes over the compressed
graph at query time. It constructs a compact dependency-closed
procedural subgraph, repairs missing execution roles when
necessary, and renders each macro at the lowest sufficient level,
including name, contract, outline, or full source.
To maintain compression as the library evolves, 
SkillZip intro-
duces ReZip, which incrementally updates the compressed graph
as new skills and execution traces arrive. It reuses existing macros
for compatible regions, promotes recurring contract-valid residuals
into new macros, and uses execution evidence to increase hydration
detail, split, or retire risky macros. In summary, the advantages of
SkillZip can be abbreviated as follows:
• 
Section-level procedural memory. SkillZip organizes source-
grounded, contract-bearing sections as reusable units of proce-
dural memory and represents each skill as an executable graph
over them. This representation exposes internal reuse while re-
taining execution roles, dependencies, verifiers, and provenance.
• Contract-preserving macro compression. SkillZip replaces
recurring procedural motifs with ported macro nodes while pre-
serving boundary contracts, dependency closure, verifier reacha-
bility, and reversible source expansion.
2

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
• Budgeted executable context hydration. SkillZip retrieves
compact, dependency-closed procedural subgraphs from the com-
pressed library and progressively expands macros only when
execution requires more detail.
• 
Execution-aware incremental maintenance. SkillZip incre-
mentally updates its macro dictionary through new-skill match-
ing, residual motif promotion, and risky macro revision, keeping
compressed procedures aligned with execution evidence.
• 
Effectiveness, efficiency, and scalability. (a) SkillZip oper-
ates as a plug-and-play procedural-memory layer across six LLM
backbones on both technical and embodied benchmarks without
backbone-specific fine-tuning. (b) SkillZip achieves a 3.46× com-
pression ratio and a 71.0% reduction in active storage while re-
taining 99.2% dependency preservation and 98.7% verifier reach-
ability. Its retrieval advantage remains as the library scales from
200 to 100K skills. (c) SkillZip achieves the best end-task perfor-
mance in every directly comparable setting, outperforming the
strongest baseline SkillDAG by up to 12.2 points on ALFWorld.
2 RELATED WORK
Agent skills and procedural memory. Tool-augmented agents
combine LLM reasoning with external actions through prompting,
learned tool invocation, and large API collections [18, 34, 35, 53]. Be-
yond individual calls, reusable procedural knowledge allows agents
to accumulate executable programs, distill feedback into experience,
or retrieve workflows from prior trajectories [38, 45, 46, 57]. Agent
Skills [51] formalizes this idea as deployable packages containing
instructions, scripts, references, and resources. Recent studies or-
ganize the broader skill lifecycle through a unified taxonomy [59],
characterize redundancy and safety properties in real-world skill
ecosystems [23], and acquire reusable skills from web interaction
or heterogeneous scientific resources [36, 58]. Systems and bench-
marks further study skill creation, management, retrieval, gener-
ation, and compatibility at scale [4, 9, 17, 20, 22, 41, 60]. Together,
these studies establish skills as durable procedural memory, but they
typically reuse whole skill packages and leave recurring internal
procedures across skills under-modeled.
Skill retrieval and execution. A major challenge in large skill
libraries is retrieving useful skills while keeping the execution
context coherent. Prior work addresses this problem by progres-
sively loading skill metadata before full bodies [51], organizing
skills through dependencies, groups, conflicts, or specializations
[1, 24, 54], and adapting retrieval across different levels of skill gran-
ularity [27, 29]. Other systems construct execution graphs after skill
selection [17, 48]. SkillGraph [19] retrieves ordered subgraphs from
an evolving skill-level dependency graph, while SkillOps [33] com-
bines typed skill contracts with an ecosystem graph for library
diagnosis and maintenance. Related graph-based retrieval and rout-
ing methods use topology to preserve multi-step context [7, 47, 49].
These methods improve which skills are selected and how selected
skills are coordinated. However, their main focus remains skill-level
retrieval or task-time orchestration.
Skill and graph compression. Prompt and skill compression
methods shorten contexts through token selection, rewriting, or
compact representations [8, 10, 11, 32, 44, 50]. Procedural-memory
methods further abstract successful experience into reusable skills,
rules, or memories [2, 28, 31, 55, 56, 61]. In parallel, graph mining
and summarization provide tools for discovering and compress-
ing repeated structure, including frequent-subgraph mining, MDL-
based summaries, grammar-based replacement, and incremental
maintenance [5, 12–16, 26, 30, 37, 43, 52]. These techniques provide
useful foundations, but agent skill libraries require compression
that preserves execution interfaces, dependency closure, verifier
reachability, and source provenance.
More detailed related work is discussed in Appendix E.
3 PRELIMINARIES
Consider an agent skill library S = {𝑠
1
, . . . , 𝑠
𝑛 
}. Each package 𝑠 ∈ S
contains procedural artifacts such as instructions, scripts, tests, and
resources. A conventional retriever maps a query 𝑞 to packages
𝑅(𝑞) ⊆ S. We retain these packages as source provenance but
model the library at a finer procedural granularity.
Definition 1 (Section node). A section node is a typed proce-
dural unit 𝑣 = ⟨𝜏
𝑣
, 𝑐
𝑣
, 𝑋
𝑣
, 𝑌
𝑣
, 𝑅
𝑣
, 𝐺
𝑣
, src
𝑣 
⟩, where 𝜏
𝑣 
is the execution
role, 𝑐
𝑣 
is the section content, 𝑋
𝑣 
and 𝑌
𝑣 
are input and output sig-
natures, 𝑅
𝑣 
records resources or tools, 𝐺
𝑣 
records guard or verifier
conditions, and src
𝑣 
points to the original skill source.
We use nine operational roles: Intent, Trigger, Input, Precon-
dition, Operation, Resource, Failure, Verifier, and Output.
These roles describe a section’s procedural function rather than its
position in a source file. Each source occurrence remains a distinct
section node. Contract-compatible occurrences may additionally
link to a shared canonical prototype, which exposes reuse without
erasing skill membership, multiplicity, or occurrence-specific source
pointers. A prototype is an auxiliary node that stores a normalized
role and contract signature plus links to its source occurrences; it
is not itself a source occurrence.
Definition 2 (Procedural skill graph). Given S, a proce-
dural skill graph is G = (V, E
𝑑𝑒𝑝 
, E
𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑙𝑙 
, E
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
, E
𝑒𝑞 
), where V =
V
𝑜𝑐𝑐 
∪ V
𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑜 
contains occurrence-specific section nodes and aux-
iliary prototypes, E
𝑑𝑒𝑝 
stores typed procedural dependencies, E
𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑙𝑙
stores skill membership edges, E
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
links sections to external resources,
and E
𝑒𝑞 
links source occurrences to compatible canonical prototypes.
We use E = E
𝑑𝑒𝑝 
∪ E
𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑙𝑙 
∪ E
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
∪ E
𝑒𝑞 
to denote the full edge set.
A dependency edge is 𝑒 = (𝑢, 𝑣, 𝜌
𝑒 
), where 𝑢, 𝑣 ∈ V and 𝜌
𝑒 
is a
typed relation such as Reqires, Binds, UsesResource, Verifies, or
Repairs. Multiple typed edges express multi-input and multi-output
procedures, while subgraph ports expose their external contract.
The fields (𝑋
𝑣
, 𝑌
𝑣
, 𝑅
𝑣
, 𝐺
𝑣 
), typed edges, and ports together form
a procedural contract with three aspects: interface covers typed I/O
and resource bindings; execution covers preconditions, dependen-
cies, guards, effects, and failure handling; and verification covers
success conditions and verifier hooks. The aspects are validated
separately, while src
𝑣 
retains provenance for reversible expansion.
Definition 3 (Skill procedural subgraph). A skill 𝑠 is rep-
resented as an executable procedural subgraph ℎ
𝑠 
= (𝑉
𝑠 
, 𝐸
𝑠 
, 𝑟
𝑠 
, 𝑡
𝑠 
)
inside G, where 𝑉
𝑠 
⊆ V
𝑜𝑐𝑐 
, 𝐸
𝑠 
⊆ E, 𝑟
𝑠 
is an intent or trigger root, and
𝑡
𝑠 
is a verified output section. The subgraph connects all procedural
roles required from the root to the verified output.
Definition 4 (Macro node). A ported macro node 𝑀
𝑔 
: 𝐼
𝑔 
⇒ 𝑂
𝑔
compresses a connected section subgraph 𝑔 = (𝑉
𝑔
, 𝐸
𝑔
) with boundary
inputs 𝐼
𝑔
, boundary outputs 𝑂
𝑔
, and expansion rule 𝑀
𝑔 
⇒ (𝑉
𝑔
, 𝐸
𝑔
, 𝜒
𝑔
),
3

Xingyu Tan et al.
Outcome
Topology-Aware
Context Compilation
1.Constrained Subgraph
Search
 
Seed Set
2. Scaffold Repair
& Context Filling
Unified
Graph
Input:
1.Boundary
Clear 
2.Signature
Stable
3.Dependency
Closed 
4.Verifier
Reachable
Contract Validation
Build
Contract
Compute
Compression
Gain ( )
Pass 
Filter & Sorted
on
Reversible
Source
Expansion
Graph Grammar
Macro 
Macro
Rewriting
Macro
Macro
Dictionary
Compressed
Graph
Motif Mining
RRF
Concentrate
Dual-Level
Seed Fusion
Skill-Level
Evidence
Visible Inputs
Expected Output
Executor Profile
Required Capabilities
Subgoal
Goal
Subgoal
Query Task
...
Task Anchoring
Section-Level
Evidence
Macro
Macro
Macro-Level
Hydration
Compact
Execution
Contract 
Agent/Robot
Executor
Context
Rendering
Input:
Macro
Dictionary
Compressed
Graph
Macro
Query
Task 
Macro
Update
Maintenance
Execution
Traces
Input:
Sec2Graph: Building Procedural Subgraphs
MotifZip: Contract-Preserving Compression
PathHydrate: Budgeted Executable Context
Intent Trigger
Precondition
Resource
Verifier
Operation
Failure
Output
Input
Contract
Extraction
Intent Trigger
Precondition
Operation Resource
Failure Verifier
Output
Input
Contract
Extraction
Intent Trigger
Precondition
Operation Resource
Failure Verifier
Output
Input
. . .
. . .
...
Section
Grounding 
Cross-Skill Reuse
Skill
Package
Input:
Contract Extraction 
Procedural Subgraph
Construction
Persistent
Compressed
Library
Unified
Graph
ReZip: Incremental
Library Maintenance
New
Skills
Input:
Sec2Graph
Refinement
Promote
Demote
Match & Reuse
Existing Macros
Macro 
Discover New
& Insert Skill
Figure 2: Overview of the SkillZip framework. Sec2Graph retains occurrence-specific sections and links compatible ones through
canonical prototypes; MotifZip rewrites recurring contract-valid subgraphs as reversible macros; PathHydrate compiles a
budgeted executable context; and ReZip updates the compressed library from new skills and execution feedback.
where 𝜒
𝑔 
is the procedural contract of the macro, retaining the inter-
face, execution, and verification aspects of 𝑔. Source pointers attached
to the stored subgraph support reversible expansion.
For an operation or macro node 𝑢 and verifier node 𝑧 in a proce-
dural subgraph 𝑃 = (𝑉
𝑃 
, 𝐸
𝑃 
), 𝑧 is reachable from 𝑢 if a directed path
𝑢 { 𝑧 exists in (𝑉
𝑃 
, 𝐸
𝑃 
∩ E
𝑑𝑒𝑝 
). Verifier reachability holds when
every state-changing operation or macro node in 𝑃 has at least one
such verifier. A valid macro preserves this condition and all three
contract aspects across compatible occurrences.
Problem statement. Given a skill library S, SkillZip builds a raw
section graph G and a macro dictionary M, producing a compressed
graph G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
= G/M. Given a task query 𝑞, executor profile 𝑝, and
context budget 𝐵, SkillZip as the skill provider returns a rendered
context 𝐶
𝑞 
to the executor by hydrating 𝑃
𝑞 
⊆ G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
. A valid 𝑃
𝑞 
must
cover query anchors, close required dependencies, keep verifiers
reachable, and remain expandable to source sections when needed.
4 METHOD
SkillZip is built around one central requirement: a compressed skill
library must remain executable. A shorter context is not enough if
it drops an input contract, hides a guard, or separates an operation
from its verifier. We therefore keep the procedural contract explicit
throughout the pipeline. As shown in Figure 2, SkillZip first opens
each package into source-grounded typed procedural sections, then
compresses repeated section subgraphs into reversible macros, and
finally hydrates only the parts needed by the current task. When the
library evolves, ReZip uses execution evidence to promote newly
reusable routines and revise macros that become unsafe.
4.1 Sec2Graph: Building Procedural Subgraphs
Sec2Graph addresses the first obstacle in skill compression: a whole
skill package is too coarse to reveal reusable or execution-critical
parts. Since a package may mix instructions, scripts, schemas,
tests, examples, and warnings, Sec2Graph converts it into a source-
grounded procedural subgraph that MotifZip can compress and
PathHydrate can query. The pseudocode is shown in Appendix A.2.
Section node construction. We first convert package content into
typed section nodes with explicit sources and procedural contracts.
Section grounding. Sec2Graph grounds a skill package by splitting
it into source-traceable sections and assigning each section an exe-
cution role. Given a skill package 𝑠, it first segments candidate sec-
tions B
𝑠 
= SegmentSkill(𝑠) using headings, lists, code blocks, warn-
ings, argument descriptions, tool references, and tests as boundary
cues. When these cues are incomplete, a model-assisted parser
refines the boundaries while preserving source pointers. It then
assigns each candidate 𝑏 ∈ B
𝑠 
an execution role 𝜏
𝑏 
= InferRole(𝑏),
producing role-labeled units for later contract extraction. For exam-
ple, in a tabular skill, “infer the delimiter” is an Operation, while
“verify that row counts are unchanged” is a Verifier.
Contract extraction. Typing alone is insufficient because similar op-
eration sections may require different inputs or checks. Sec2Graph
extracts a compact local contract for each section node 𝑣, including
typed I/O (𝑋
𝑣
, 𝑌
𝑣 
) and resources 𝑅
𝑣 
for the interface, while guards
and verifier conditions are recorded in 𝐺
𝑣 
. Dependency, repair, and
verifier edges make execution and validation relationships explicit,
and the source pointer src
𝑣 
keeps the original package traceable.
Procedural subgraph construction. After section nodes are
grounded, Sec2Graph connects them into an executable procedural
subgraph. Weak-order edges preserve local order inside a skill;
dependency edges bind operations to inputs, preconditions, and
resources; verifier edges connect operations to reachable checks;
and repair edges connect failure handlers to the guards that trigger
them. A skill membership edge records which nodes belong to the
4

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
same source package. For each skill, Sec2Graph marks an intent or
trigger node as the root and a verified output node as the terminal
node. This turns the package from a text bundle into a structured
procedure with explicit start, requirements, actions, and validation.
Cross-skill reuse. Finally, Sec2Graph exposes reuse across the
library. Compatible sections remain occurrence-specific nodes and
are linked to a shared canonical prototype only when their roles,
boundary signatures, resources, and verifier behavior agree. The
prototype makes common routines visible, such as tabular ingestion
shared by cleaning, pivoting, and plotting skills, while each occur-
rence keeps its skill membership, local edges, and source pointer.
Motif support is counted over source occurrences rather than proto-
types. The output is the persistent section graph G, which supports
structural compression without losing occurrence identity.
4.2 MotifZip: Contract-Preserving Compression
Once Sec2Graph exposes the library as procedural subgraphs, re-
peated routines become visible. The difficulty is deciding which
repetitions are safe to compress. Surface similarity alone is unsafe,
i.e., two spans may both describe “load data” while requiring dif-
ferent outputs or verifiers. MotifZip therefore uses a lightweight
typed graph grammar to mine recurring typed subgraphs and re-
place only contract-valid ones with reversible macros. Each macro
records typed ports, executable contracts, verifier hooks, and source
expansion pointers. The pseudocode is shown in Appendix A.3.
Interface-aware motif mining. MotifZip avoids unrestricted fre-
quent subgraph mining over the whole library. It first proposes
candidates from compatible execution interfaces, and then counts
only occurrences whose boundary behavior is consistent.
Typed candidate generation. Because skill procedures contain
typed roles, directed dependencies, and weak-order edges, can-
didate search starts from execution interfaces. Sections are grouped
by role signature, resource family, and I/O shape, and candidates
are grown along dependency and weak-order edges:
C = GrowMotifs(BucketBySignature(G), G). (1)
Prototype links provide the grouping index, but motif growth and
occurrence matching are performed on the occurrence-specific pro-
cedural graph. Semantic similarity is used only after this structural
compatibility check. Each candidate motif is represented as a typed
attributed subgraph 𝑔 = (𝑉
𝑔
, 𝐸
𝑔
, ℓ
𝑔
), where ℓ
𝑔 
records role labels,
I/O signatures, resource families, and verifier tags. This typed buck-
eting restricts motif growth to interface-compatible neighborhoods
instead of comparing arbitrary subgraphs across the full library.
Occurrence support. A candidate motif is useful only if it reappears
with compatible external behavior. MotifZip therefore matches each
𝑔 back to the raw graph and records its occurrences. An occurrence
𝜔 = (𝜓
𝜔 
, 𝜙
𝜔 
) maps motif nodes to section nodes through 𝜓
𝜔 
and
motif ports to boundary-crossing edges through 𝜙
𝜔 
. Support is
counted over non-conflicting occurrences: two occurrences conflict
if they share an internal source section node or require incompatible
port reconnections. Thus, support measures reusable procedural
structure rather than repeated text spans. Canonical prototypes
guide candidate matching but are not counted as occurrences.
Contract-preserving grammar construction. After motif sup-
port is established, MotifZip checks whether a supported subgraph
can be replaced without changing how the surrounding graph calls,
executes, or verifies it. This stage validates the macro contract and
records a reversible grammar rule.
Contract validation. For each supported motif, MotifZip builds a
macro boundary and contract (𝐼
𝑔
, 𝑂
𝑔
, 𝜒
𝑔
) = BuildContract(𝑔, Ω
𝑔
),
where Ω
𝑔 
is the set of compatible occurrences. The motif is accepted
only if three conditions hold. First, its interface is stable: input/out-
put ports, role signatures, and resource requirements agree across
occurrences. Second, its execution is closed: dependencies are ei-
ther internal to the motif or explicitly exposed through macro ports.
Third, its verification remains reachable: every state-changing op-
eration keeps its verifier inside macro contract or reachable from
macro output. These checks prevent compression from hiding cross-
boundary dependencies or detaching operations from their required
checks, so each macro preserves its recorded executable contract.
Graph grammar rule. An accepted motif becomes a production rule
in a typed attributed graph grammar:
𝑀
𝑔 
[𝐼
𝑔
, 𝑂
𝑔
] ⇒ (𝑉
𝑔
, 𝐸
𝑔
, 𝜋
𝑔
, 𝜒
𝑔
), (2)
where 𝑀
𝑔 
is a nonterminal macro node, 𝐼
𝑔 
and 𝑂
𝑔 
are typed ports,
𝜋
𝑔 
records occurrence-specific node and port mappings, and 𝜒
𝑔 
is
the executable contract. Rewriting an occurrence removes only the
internal nodes of the matched motif, inserts 𝑀
𝑔
, and reconnects
external edges through the port map 𝜙
𝜔 
. Expansion performs the
inverse operation and restores the source-grounded section graph.
Macro selection and representation. The last step decides which
contract-valid motifs should actually enter the macro dictionary.
MotifZip first scores the candidate by compression benefit and
execution risk, then performs conflict-aware rewriting.
Compression gain. Not every valid motif is worth compressing.
MotifZip scores each motif by a local description-length gain:
Δ(𝑔) = freq(𝑔)𝐿(𝑔) − 𝐿(𝑀
𝑔
) − 𝐿(rule
𝑔
)
+ 𝛼 Reuse(𝑔) − 𝜆 Cut(𝑔) − 𝜇 Risk(𝑔). 
(3)
Here freq(𝑔) is the number of non-conflicting occurrences selected
for rewriting. The first term rewards replacing repeated instances
of 𝑔 with one macro and one expansion rule. Reuse(𝑔) favors
reuse across distinct skills or task families; Cut(𝑔) penalizes bound-
ary loss; and Risk(𝑔) penalizes weak verifier support or ambigu-
ous contracts. The nonnegative weights 𝛼, 𝜆, and 𝜇 control these
MotifZip-specific terms. Thus, the score selects a macro only when
its description-length saving justifies the execution risk.
Macro rewriting. Candidates are processed greedily in descending
Δ(𝑔). MotifZip skips overlapping rewrites, creates a ported macro
for each accepted motif, and stores the production rule, occurrence
mappings, boundary ports, verifier hooks, source pointers, and
rendering levels. A macro can be rendered as a name, contract,
outline, or full source. It is therefore a reversible procedural rewrite
rule, not an opaque summary. The conflict-aware greedy policy
keeps rewriting tractable over large libraries and does not claim
global optimality over all overlapping motifs.
Proposition 1 (Compositional structural lifting). Let Ω
be a set of pairwise non-conflicting motif occurrences accepted by Mo-
tifZip. Denote 𝜅
Ω 
, 𝜉
Ω 
as their simultaneous macro rewriting and source
expansion. If a raw procedural subgraph 𝑃 contains, for each occur-
rence in Ω, either all or none of its internal nodes, then 𝜉
Ω 
(𝜅
Ω 
(𝑃))  𝑃
5

Xingyu Tan et al.
up to auxiliary prototype links, and isomorphism preserves typed ex-
ternal dependencies and operation-to-verifier reachability.
Proof sketch. Consider first a single occurrence 𝜔. (i) Identifi-
cation. The occurrence map 𝜋
𝑔 
identifies its source nodes, and 𝜙
𝜔
maps every boundary-crossing edge to a typed macro port; depen-
dency closure guarantees that no crossing edge is left unrecorded.
(ii) Expansion. 𝜉 therefore restores exactly original internal nodes
and edges and reconnects every external edge through its recorded
port, so each required verifier path is either untouched or recovered
from the stored occurrence. (iii) Composition. Because MotifZip
rejects conflicting occurrences, rewriting one occurrence alters
neither the internal nodes nor the port map of any other; the single-
occurrence argument thus applies independently to each element
of Ω, and induction over |Ω| yields the stated isomorphism. □
This lifting property links compression to execution: MotifZip
rewrites only regions whose recorded source structure can be re-
covered compositionally, and PathHydrate relies on this guaran-
tee when retrieving from the compressed graph. The guarantee is
structural rather than semantic. It recovers the recorded interfaces,
dependencies, verifier paths, and source provenance, but does not
establish the equivalence of unrecorded behavior or the correctness
of a verifier itself. Section 5 and Appendix B.1 then evaluate how
reliably these recorded contracts are preserved in practice.
4.3 PathHydrate: Budgeted Executable Context
MotifZip produces a compact library, but a task still needs an execu-
tion context that is both small and complete. PathHydrate solves this
online problem. It maps the query to procedural anchors, concen-
trates section seeds without losing skill-level coherence, searches
for a compact connected subgraph, and then renders macros only
to the detail level required by the task. The pseudocode is shown
in Appendix A.4.
Query-guided seed construction. This stage translates a natural-
language task into graph anchors and then uses both section-level
and skill-level evidence to build a coherent seed set.
Task anchoring. PathHydrate first converts the raw query into a
structured task object:
𝑧
𝑞 
= (𝑔
𝑞
, 𝑂
𝑞
, Γ
𝑞
, 𝐼
𝑞
, 𝐷
𝑞
, {𝑑
𝑖 
}), (4)
compactly written as 𝑧
𝑞 
= AnalyzeTask(𝑞, 𝑝). Here 𝑔
𝑞 
is the goal,
𝑂
𝑞 
are expected outputs, Γ
𝑞 
are required capabilities, 𝐼
𝑞 
are visible
inputs, 𝐷
𝑞 
is a domain or executor profile, and {𝑑
𝑖 
} is an ordered list
of subgoals. These anchors translate task language into the same
execution-role space used by Sec2Graph.
Dual-level seed fusion. The anchors are then mapped to section
seeds through two complementary views. Let e(·) denote the em-
bedding function used for dense matching. Each section node 𝑣 is
scored by the better match under the subgoal and raw-query views:
𝑠 (𝑣, 𝑑
𝑖 
, 𝑞) = max{cos(e(𝑑
𝑖 
), e(𝑣)), cos(e(𝑞), e(𝑣))}. (5)
The subgoal view emphasizes capability and output-signature
matching, while the raw-query view preserves names, resources,
and entities that may be omitted by the abstraction. Because section-
level retrieval can scatter seeds across unrelated skills, PathHydrate
also builds two skill-level rankings: one from skill descriptions and
one from the best section match inside each skill. For a candidate
skill 𝜎, the rankings are fused by reciprocal-rank fusion:
RRF(𝜎) =
∑︁
𝑟 ∈ R
𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘
1
𝑘 + rank
𝑟 
(𝜎) 
, (6)
where R
𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 
= {𝑅
doc
, 𝑅
node 
} contains skill-description and node-
max rankings, respectively; rank
𝑟 
(𝜎) is the one-based position of 𝜎
in ranking 𝑟 , and is set to +∞ when 𝜎 is absent; and 𝑘 is smoothing
constant. The fused skill set concentrates the seed pool while still
allowing high-confidence section-level rescue. This step connects
fine-grained section precision with package-level coherence.
Topology-aware context compilation. Once the seed pool is
coherent, PathHydrate must turn it into executable context. It first
searches for a compact connected subgraph, then repairs the role
scaffold that execution requires.
Constrained subgraph search. Given the fused seeds, PathHydrate
searches for a compact graph object that can serve as executable
context. The ideal objective is:
𝑃
★
𝑞 
= arg min
𝑃 ⊆ G
𝑧𝑖𝑝
𝜂𝑇 (𝑃) + 𝛽 |𝑃 | + 𝛾𝐸 (𝑃) − 𝛿 Match(𝑃, 𝑞), 
(7)
subject to anchor coverage, dependency closure, verifier reacha-
bility, and the budget 𝑇 (𝑃) ≤ 𝐵. Here 𝑇 (𝑃) is the estimated token
cost of the selected procedural payload at its current hydration
levels before rendering. |𝑃 | is the number of hydrated sections
or macros, 𝐸 (𝑃) estimates future expansion cost, and Match(𝑃, 𝑞)
measures coverage of task anchors and matched section seeds. The
nonnegative weights 𝜂, 𝛽, 𝛾, and 𝛿 are specific to the PathHydrate
objective. At runtime, PathHydrate adds low-cost connectors until
the required roles are closed or the next addition would exceed the
procedural-content budget. Thus, search remains bounded by the
task budget without materializing the growing raw library.
Scaffold repair and context filling. A connected subgraph can still
be incomplete for execution, so PathHydrate then repairs the scaf-
fold around selected operations: it walks backward to recover In-
put, Precondition, and Resource sections, and walks forward to
recover Failure, Verifier, and Output sections. Closure repair
produces (𝑃, 𝜉
𝑞 
) = RepairClosure(𝑃, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, 𝐵), where 𝜉
𝑞 
records re-
stored or infeasible roles. If no verifier-reachable context fits the
budget, the system falls back to the smallest skill-level bundle cov-
ering the anchors. Context filling is sufficiency-gated rather than
budget-seeking: it terminates once the task anchors are covered,
required dependencies are closed, and a verifier remains reachable.
Thus, unused budget is not spent on additional procedural text.
Progressive hydration and rendering. The selected subgraph
is still an internal graph object. PathHydrate turns it into agent-
readable context by choosing macro detail levels and rendering the
selected units as an executable context.
Macro-level hydration. The selected subgraph may contain either
source sections or macros. For each selected macro, PathHydrate
chooses the lowest sufficient hydration level: name, contract, out-
line, or full source. If the macro contract does not expose a needed
input, guard condition, verifier, or source pointer, the macro is ex-
panded. This upgrades progressive disclosure from package level
to graph level: SkillZip reveals the smallest executable view of a
section graph instead of loading an entire skill body.
6

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
Table 1: Main results on SkillsBench and ALFWorld. R is task reward (%) on SkillsBench or episode success rate (%) on
ALFWorld. Arrows report point changes from Vector Skills. The best comparable results are in bold.
Backbone Method 
SkillsBench [20] ALFWorld [40]
R↑ Ret@1↑ Ret@5↑ MRR↑ R↑ Ret@1↑ Ret@5↑ MRR↑
MiniMax-M2.7
Vanilla Skills 17.2 ↑ 6.8 – – – 47.1 ↓ 3.6 – – –
Vector Skills 10.4 3.6 10.8 5.8 50.7 37.9 68.6 49.2
GoS [24] 18.7 ↑ 8.3 50.6 ↑ 47.0 65.5 ↑ 54.7 57.3 ↑ 51.5 54.3 ↑ 3.6 56.4 ↑ 18.5 86.4 ↑ 17.8 67.9 ↑ 18.7
SkillDAG [1] 27.3 ↑ 16.9 66.7 ↑ 63.1 78.2 ↑ 67.4 71.3 ↑ 65.5 67.1 ↑ 16.4 57.9 ↑ 20.0 92.1 ↑ 23.5 71.1 ↑ 21.9
SkillZip 33.3 ↑ 22.9 73.6 ↑ 70.0 92.0 ↑ 81.2 81.3 ↑ 75.5 79.3 ↑ 28.6 85.7 ↑ 47.8 98.6 ↑ 30.0 91.2 ↑ 42.0
gpt-5.2-codex
Vanilla Skills 27.4 ↑ 5.9 – – – 89.3 ↓ 3.6 – – –
Vector Skills 21.5 3.6 10.8 5.8 92.9 37.9 68.6 49.2
GoS [24] 34.4 ↑ 12.9 50.6 ↑ 47.0 65.5 ↑ 54.7 57.3 ↑ 51.5 93.6 ↑ 0.7 56.4 ↑ 18.5 86.4 ↑ 17.8 67.9 ↑ 18.7
SkillDAG [1] 36.8 ↑ 15.3 70.1 ↑ 66.5 75.9 ↑ 65.1 73.0 ↑ 67.2 93.6 ↑ 0.7 60.4 ↑ 22.5 85.1 ↑ 16.5 69.6 ↑ 20.4
SkillZip 43.0 ↑ 21.5 74.7 ↑ 71.1 88.5 ↑ 77.7 81.0 ↑ 75.2 96.4 ↑ 3.5 90.7 ↑ 52.8 99.3 ↑ 30.7 95.0 ↑ 45.8
Execution-context rendering. The final context is rendered as a
compact executable context rather than a concatenation of snip-
pets, denoted as 𝐶
𝑞 
= RenderContract(𝑈 , 𝑝, 𝐵), where 𝑈 denotes
the selected source sections and hydrated macro views. The ren-
dered context includes intent, bound inputs, required preconditions,
hydrated operations, resources, guards, failure handlers, verifiers,
and source expansion pointers. For a spreadsheet task, PathHy-
drate may load a shared tabular-ingest contract plus a pivot-total
verifier while leaving chart-rendering sections out of context. The
hydration log L
𝑞 
records selected sections, macro levels, token
cost, late expansions, verifier coverage, and source pointers. These
logs connect runtime behavior back to the structural constraints
enforced by MotifZip and provide the feedback used by ReZip.
Closed-loop invariants. The runtime postconditions mirror the
compression constraints. Sec2Graph exposes section roles and
source pointers; MotifZip accepts a macro only after boundary,
signature, dependency-closure, and verifier-reachability checks;
and PathHydrate records anchor coverage, restored dependencies,
verifier status, macro levels, and source expansions in L
𝑞 
. The same
quantities are used by the structure-aware evaluation protocol, so
the empirical metrics test whether compression remains executable
rather than merely shorter.
4.4 ReZip: Incremental Library Maintenance
ReZip closes the compression-execution loop as the library evolves.
We model each update as a transition over the compressed library:
Z
𝑡 
= (G
𝑡
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M
𝑡 
, B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
, Σ
𝑡 
), Z
𝑡+1 
= ReZip(Z
𝑡 
, 𝑢
𝑡 
), (8)
where B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
stores unmatched residual subgraphs, Σ
𝑡 
stores macro-
level execution evidence, and 𝑢
𝑡 
is either a new skill or an execution
trace. New skills provide evidence for reusable structure, while
traces reveal abstractions that require revision. The pseudocode is
shown in Appendix A.5.
New-skill assimilation. Sec2Graph first converts an arriving skill
into a procedural subgraph. ReZip matches each connected region
against existing macros using typed ports and the interface, exe-
cution, and verification aspects of their contracts. A compatible
region reuses the macro while retaining an occurrence-specific
source map; unmatched regions remain explicit and enter B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
.
ReZip promotes a residual motif 𝑟 only when:
supp
𝑡 
(𝑟 ) ≥ 𝑚, Δ(𝑟 ) > 0, Valid
𝜒 
(𝑟 ) = 1, (9)
where supp
𝑡 
(𝑟 ) is the number of distinct source skills supporting 𝑟
up to update step 𝑡, 𝑚 is the minimum cross-skill support required
for promotion, Δ(𝑟 ) is the MotifZip compression gain, and Valid
𝜒
applies the same port, dependency-closure, and verifier checks as
offline compression. Thus, library growth reuses established macros
immediately but introduces a new abstraction only after repeated
contract-compatible evidence. The promoted occurrences are then
removed from the residual buffer.
Execution-aware macro revision. For each observed macro 𝑀,
Σ
𝑡 
(𝑀) records its uses, source expansions, verifier failures, and
downstream repair cost. ReZip summarizes these signals as
𝜌
𝑡 
(𝑀) = 𝜆
𝑒
𝑛
exp 
(𝑀)
𝑛
use 
(𝑀) 
+ 𝜆
𝑣
𝑛
fail 
(𝑀)
𝑛
use 
(𝑀) 
+ 𝜆
𝑑
𝑐
repair 
(𝑀)
𝑛
use 
(𝑀) 
. (10)
The weights 𝜆
𝑒 
, 𝜆
𝑣 
, and 𝜆
𝑑 
balance insufficient macro detail, failed
verification, and downstream recovery effort. When 𝜌
𝑡 
(𝑀) exceeds
a risk threshold, ReZip performs controlled demotion: it first raises
the hydration level for the affected task profile; persistent risk
causes the macro to be split into narrower contract-compatible rules
or retired in favor of its source sections. Every promoted macro
therefore satisfies MotifZip contract checks, while every revision
retains a source-grounded expansion. Consequently, G
𝑡+1
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
preserves
the executable-subgraph lifting invariant used by PathHydrate.
5 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate SkillZip on SkillsBench and ALFWorld.
The detailed experimental settings, including baselines, evaluation
metrics, and implementations, are provided in Appendix D.
5.1 Main Results
(RQ1) Does SkillZip improve end-to-end task performance?
To evaluate the overall effectiveness of SkillZip, we compare Skil-
lZip with Vanilla Skills, Vector Skills, GoS, and SkillDAG, covering
full-skill loading, embedding-based retrieval, and graph-based re-
trieval under the same benchmark and backbone settings. As shown
in Table 1, SkillZip consistently achieves the best end-to-end per-
formance across both benchmarks and both backbone LLMs. With
MiniMax-M2.7, SkillZip obtains a task reward of 33.3 on Skills-
Bench and an episode success rate of 79.3 on ALFWorld, improving
by 6.0 points and 12.2 points over SkillDAG. When using gpt-5.2-
codex, SkillZip further reaches 43.0 on SkillsBench and 96.4 on
ALFWorld, improving by 6.2 points and 2.8 points over SkillDAG.
Notably, both GoS and SkillDAG already achieve 93.6% success
7

Xingyu Tan et al.
Table 2: Compression and structural-fidelity results on
SkillsBench. The complete SkillZip configuration is shaded.
Representation CR↑ Tok↓ DPR↑ VR↑ Recover.↓ R↑
Raw section graph 1.00× 6,716 100.0 100.0 0.0 31.0
Exact-text dedup. 1.43× 4,697 98.6 98.1 5.2 31.2
Text compression [32] 3.46× 1,941 65.0 60.0 45.0 25.5
Generic graph grammar 2.91× 2,308 93.4 90.8 22.7 29.4
SkillZip w/o checks 3.78× 1,777 88.9 84.6 31.5 27.8
SkillZip 3.46× 1,941 99.2 98.7 14.8 33.3
on ALFWorld with gpt-5.2-codex, leaving limited room for further
improvement, yet SkillZip still raises the success rate to 96.4%. One
possible explanation for the weaker Vector Skills results is that
whole-skill embeddings are affected by shared boilerplate and for-
matting content, making closely related packages difficult to distin-
guish. This interpretation is consistent with the higher similar-skill
confusion observed for skill-level retrieval in Appendix B.2. Overall,
these consistent gains across different backbones and task formats
demonstrate retrieving execution-complete sections provides more
useful procedural context than loading or retrieving skills as indi-
visible packages. On the matched MiniMax-M2.7 SkillsBench runs,
SkillZip also reduces cumulative prompt processing by 47.0% and
average tool calls by 21.7% relative to SkillDAG, while reducing
uncached prompt input by 18.7% and end-to-end task time by 21.1%.
Appendix B.5 provides the full breakdown and distinguishes these
trajectory-level counters from the one-time hydrated skill context.
(RQ2) Does section-level retrieval improve retrieval quality?
To assess whether the end-task gains come from more precise pro-
cedural exposure, we evaluate retrieval on gold-annotated queries
and map each retrieved section back to its source skill. As shown
in Table 1, SkillZip consistently improves retrieval quality over
SkillDAG across both benchmarks and backbone LLMs. On Skills-
Bench, SkillZip increases Ret@1 from 66.7 to 73.6 and Ret@5 from
78.2 to 92.0 with MiniMax-M2.7, while also raising MRR by 10.0.
The same trend holds with gpt-5.2-codex, where SkillZip improves
Ret@5 by 12.6 over SkillDAG. The gain is more pronounced on
ALFWorld: Ret@1 increases by 27.8 with MiniMax-M2.7 and by
30.3 with gpt-5.2-codex. Since Ret@5 is already high for strong
graph-based baselines, the MRR gains indicate that SkillZip moves
the correct source closer to the top rather than simply recovering it
somewhere in the candidate set. Overall, these results suggest that
execution-complete sections reduce skill-level retrieval ambiguity
by separating shared routines from the operations that distinguish
each skill. This benefit becomes stronger as the library grows: Ap-
pendix B.2 shows that the Ret@1 advantage over SkillDAG widens
from 6.2 at 200 skills to 23.3 at 100K. At the largest scale, SkillZip
retains 65.1 Ret@1 with 248.3 ms online retrieval and hydration
latency. After section contracts are available, local graph construc-
tion and MotifZip complete in 178 seconds for the corresponding
100K-skill library with 4.77M section nodes (Appendix B.5).
5.2 Compression and Structural Fidelity
(RQ3) Does compression preserve executable structure? We
evaluate whether compression can reduce the rendered skill con-
text while preserving the dependencies and verification conditions
needed for execution. As shown in Table 2, exact-text deduplication
keeps most structural information, but only provides a limited com-
pression ratio of 1.43×, since it can merge only surface-identical
Table 3: Component ablation of SkillZip on SkillsBench.
Component Variant R↑ Ret@1↑ Tok↓ DPR↑ VR↑
Full SkillZip 33.3 73.6 1,941 99.2 98.7
Unit w/o section-level nodes 27.9 66.7 3,103 – –
Compression
w/o MotifZip 31.0 71.8 2,967 100.0 100.0
w/o dependency closure 28.6 72.1 1,653 82.3 92.6
w/o verifier constraint 29.1 72.8 1,668 94.9 76.4
Hydration 
w/o global section rescue 30.4 68.2 1,812 96.5 96.8
w/o adaptive hydration 31.5 73.2 2,587 99.2 98.7
sections. Text compression reaches the same rounded compres-
sion ratio and average rendered context as SkillZip, but it sharply
reduces structural fidelity: DPR drops to 65.0, VR drops to 60.0,
and 45.0% of queries require recovery from the original sections.
Its reward also falls to 25.5, showing that shorter context alone
does not guarantee executable context. Generic graph grammar
preserves more graph structure than text compression, but still
loses dependency and verifier information, leading to lower reward
than the raw section graph. Similarly, removing contract checks
makes SkillZip more compact, but the loss in DPR, VR, and reward
shows that unsafe merges can damage execution. In contrast, Skil-
lZip achieves a 3.46× compression ratio while keeping DPR and
VR close to the raw graph, at 99.2 and 98.7, respectively. It reduces
recovery from 45.0% to 14.8% relative to text compression. Relative
to the raw section graph, SkillZip improves reward from 31.0 to 33.3
while retaining near-complete structural fidelity. Compared with
text compression, SkillZip improves reward by 7.8. These results
suggest that the main benefit of SkillZip is not only compressing re-
peated procedures, but compressing them in a way that keeps their
interface, execution dependencies, and verifier contracts recover-
able. Because this preservation depends on the extracted contracts,
we additionally evaluate contract extraction against human an-
notations and under controlled field corruption in Appendix B.1,
obtaining 91.6 macro-F1 and 84.6 exact match and maintaining high
DPR and VR under 10% contract corruption.
5.3 Ablation Study
(RQ4) Which components contribute to the final perfor-
mance? To identify the contribution of each component, we con-
duct ablation studies. As shown in Table 3, replacing section-level
nodes with skill-level nodes causes the largest drop: Ret@1 de-
creases by 6.9 points, task reward drops by 5.4 points, and rendered
context increases by 59.9%. This drop occurs because section-level
procedures are the input to later stages. Without them, MotifZip
can only compress coarser patterns and PathHydrate must retrieve
from less precise context, limiting both retrieval precision and
context efficiency. The compression ablations reveal a different
division of labor. Without MotifZip, DPR and VR remain perfect,
but context increases by 52.9% and reward falls to 31.0, showing
that motif abstraction primarily removes contract-compatible re-
peated structure. This variant still uses PathHydrate and therefore
renders 2,967 tokens rather than the 6,716 tokens of full, unpruned
raw-graph retrieval in Table 2. Removing dependency closure or
verifier constraints leaves Ret@1 near the full model, but damages
executable structure: DPR falls to 82.3 without closure, while VR
falls to 76.4 without verifier constraints. Thus, correct retrieval
alone is insufficient without execution-preserving compression.
The hydration ablations further show how PathHydrate controls
8

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
the final context. Removing global section rescue reduces Ret@1 to
68.2 and reward to 30.4, showing that local expansion from the ini-
tial skill neighborhood can miss useful sections. Disabling adaptive
hydration preserves DPR and VR, but uses 33.3% more tokens. This
context-saving effect is further supported by the budget analysis in
Appendix B.4, where PathHydrate renders 1,941 tokens per task,
72.1% fewer than top-5 whole-skill loading.
To further evaluate SkillZip, we report additional studies on com-
pression and contract robustness, retrieval scalability, and proce-
dural overlap across domains (Appendix B.1–B.3); hydration quality,
context compactness, and system cost (Appendix B.4–B.5); stream-
ing maintenance, repeated-run reliability, backbone generalization,
and failure attribution (Appendix B.6–B.8); and case studies (Ap-
pendix C). A detailed outline is shown in the Appendix Outline.
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present SkillZip, a contract-preserving graph
compression framework for scalable agent skill libraries. SkillZip
organizes skills into section-level procedural graphs, compresses
repeated execution patterns, and builds compact task-specific con-
texts while preserving dependency and verifier contracts. Experi-
ments on SkillsBench and ALFWorld show that SkillZip outper-
forms strong retrieval and graph-based baselines in both end-task
performance and source-skill retrieval. Overall, SkillZip improves
skill-library scalability while maintaining executable structure, en-
abling efficient and reliable skill reuse in long-horizon agent tasks.
REFERENCES
[1] Tong Bai, Zhenglin Wan, Pengfei Zhou, Xingrui Yu, Yang You, and Ivor W. Tsang.
2026. SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at
Scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.03056 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.03056
[2] Julia Belikova, Rauf Parchiev, Evgeny Egorov, Grigorii Davydenko, Gleb Gu-
sev, Andrey Savchenko, and Maksim Makarenko. 2026. Managing Procedural
Memory in LLM Agents: Control, Adaptation, and Evaluation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2606.23127 (2026).
[3] Zachary Blumenfeld and Jim Webber. 2026. AIP: A Graph Representation for
Learning and Governing Agent Skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.04781 (2026).
[4] 
Hongcheol Cho, Ryangkyung Kang, and Youngeun Kim. 2026. SkillRet: A
Large-Scale Benchmark for Skill Retrieval in LLM Agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2605.05726 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.05726
[5] 
Diane J. Cook and Lawrence B. Holder. 1994. Substructure Discovery Using
Minimum Description Length and Background Knowledge. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research 1 (1994), 231–255. doi:10.1613/jair.43
[6] Marc-Alexandre Côté, Ákos Kádár, Xingdi Yuan, Ben Kybartas, Tavian Barnes,
Emery Fine, James Moore, Matthew Hausknecht, Layla El Asri, Mahmoud Adada,
et al. 2018. TextWorld: A Learning Environment for Text-Based Games. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.11532 (2018). https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.11532
[7] Tao Feng, Haozhen Zhang, Zijie Lei, Peixuan Han, and Jiaxuan You. 2026.
GraphPlanner: Graph Memory-Augmented Agentic Routing for Multi-Agent
LLMs. International Conference on Learning Representations (2026). https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=ZdGB7MNQDT
[8] Yudong Gao, Zongjie Li, Yuanyuan Yuan, Zimo Ji, Pingchuan Ma, and Shuai
Wang. 2026. SkillReducer: Optimizing LLM Agent Skills for Token Efficiency.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.29919 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.29919
[9] Tingxu Han, Yi Zhang, Wei Song, Chunrong Fang, Zhenyu Chen, Youcheng
Sun, and Lijie Hu. 2026. SWE-Skills-Bench: Do Agent Skills Actually Help in
Real-World Software Engineering? arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.15401 (2026).
[10] Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. 2023.
Llmlingua: Compressing prompts for accelerated inference of large language
models. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing. 13358–13376.
[11] Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Xufang Luo, Dongsheng Li, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing
Yang, and Lili Qiu. 2024. Longllmlingua: Accelerating and enhancing llms in long
context scenarios via prompt compression. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
1658–1677.
[12] Jihoon Ko, Yunbum Kook, and Kijung Shin. 2020. Incremental Lossless Graph
Summarization. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 317–327. doi:10.1145/3394486.3403074
[13] Danai Koutra, U Kang, Jilles Vreeken, and Christos Faloutsos. 2014. VoG: Sum-
marizing and Understanding Large Graphs. In Proceedings of the 2014 SIAM
International Conference on Data Mining. 91–99. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973440.11
[14] Kyoungmin Lee, Hyeonji Jo, Jihoon Ko, Sungsu Lim, and Kijung Shin. 2020.
SSumM: Sparse Summarization of Massive Graphs. In Proceedings of the 26th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
144–154. doi:10.1145/3394486.3403057
[15] 
Kyoungmin Lee, Jihoon Ko, and Kijung Shin. 2022. SLUGGER: Lossless Hierarchi-
cal Summarization of Massive Graphs. In 2022 IEEE 38th International Conference
on Data Engineering. 2878–2890. https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.05374
[16] Kristen LeFevre and Evimaria Terzi. 2010. GraSS: Graph Structure Summarization.
In Proceedings of the 2010 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining. 454–465.
doi:10.1137/1.9781611972801.40
[17] Hao Li, Chunjiang Mu, Jianhao Chen, Siyue Ren, Zhiyao Cui, Yiqun Zhang,
Lei Bai, and Shuyue Hu. 2026. Organizing, Orchestrating, and Benchmarking
Agent Skills at Ecosystem Scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.02176 (2026). https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2603.02176
[18] Minghao Li, Yingxiu Zhao, Bowen Yu, Feifan Song, Hangyu Li, Haiyang Yu,
Zhoujun Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2023. Api-bank: A comprehensive
benchmark for tool-augmented llms. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing. 3102–3116.
[19] Xiaoyuan Li, Moxin Li, Keqin Bao, Yubo Ma, Wenjie Wang, Dayiheng Liu, and
Fuli Feng. 2026. SkillGraph: Skill-Augmented Reinforcement Learning for Agents
via Evolving Skill Graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.12039 (2026). https://arxiv.
org/abs/2605.12039
[20] Xiangyi Li, Yimin Liu, Wenbo Chen, Bingran You, Zonglin Di, Yifeng He,
Shenghan Zheng, et al. 2026. SkillsBench: Benchmarking How Well Agent
Skills Work Across Diverse Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12670 (2026).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.12670
[21] Qiliang Liang, Hansi Wang, Zhong Liang, and Yang Liu. 2026. From skill text to
skill structure: The scheduling-structural-logical representation for agent skills.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.24026 (2026).
[22] Yuan Liang, Ruobin Zhong, Haoming Xu, Chen Jiang, Yi Zhong, Runnan Fang,
Jia-Chen Gu, Shumin Deng, et al. 2026. SkillNet: Create, Evaluate, and Connect
AI Skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04448 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.04448
[23] George Ling, Shanshan Zhong, and Richard Huang. 2026. Agent Skills: A Data-
Driven Analysis of Claude Skills for Extending Large Language Model Function-
ality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08004 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.08004
[24] Dawei Liu, Zongxia Li, Hongyang Du, Xiyang Wu, Shihang Gui, Yongbei Kuang,
and Lichao Sun. 2026. Graph-of-Skills: Dependency-Aware Structural Retrieval
for Massive Agent Skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.05333 (2026). https://arxiv.
org/abs/2604.05333
[25] 
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu,
Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. 2024. Agentbench: Evaluating
llms as agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations, Vol. 2024.
52989–53046.
[26] Sebastian Maneth and Fabian Peternek. 2018. Grammar-based graph compression.
Information Systems 76 (2018), 19–45. doi:10.1016/j.is.2018.03.002
[27] Xiangcheng Meng, Shu Wang, and Yixiang Fang. 2026. SkillRAE: Agent Skill-
Based Context Compilation for Retrieval-Augmented Execution. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2605.10114 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.10114
[28] Qirui Mi et al. 2026. Skill-Pro: Learning Reusable Skills from Experience via
Non-Parametric PPO for LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01869 (2026).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.01869 Accepted at ICML 2026.
[29] 
Yongliang Miao, Ziyang Yu, Liang Zhao, Bowen Zhu, and Hasibul Haque. 2026.
SkillLens: Adaptive Multi-Granularity Skill Reuse for Cost-Efficient LLM Agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.08386 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.08386
[30] Siegfried Nijssen and Joost N. Kok. 2004. A Quickstart in Frequent Struc-
ture Mining Can Make a Difference. In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 647–652.
doi:10.1145/1014052.1014134
[31] Siru Ouyang et al. 2026. ReasoningBank: Scaling Agent Self-Evolving with
Reasoning Memory. International Conference on Learning Representations (2026).
https://openreview.net/forum?id=jL7fwchScm
[32] Zhuoshi Pan et al. 2024. LLMLingua-2: Data Distillation for Efficient and Faithful
Task-Agnostic Prompt Compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12968 (2024).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12968
[33] 
Hongji Pu, Xinyuan Song, and Liang Zhao. 2026. SkillOps: Managing LLM
Agent Skill Libraries as Self-Maintaining Software Ecosystems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2605.13716 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13716
[34] Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin,
Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian,
Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun.
2024. ToolLLM: Facilitating Large Language Models to Master 16000+ Real-world
APIs. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
[35] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer:
9

Xingyu Tan et al.
Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761
[36] Shuaike Shen, Wenduo Cheng, Mingqian Ma, Alistair Turcan, Martin Jinye Zhang,
and Jian Ma. 2026. SKILLFOUNDRY: Building Self-Evolving Agent Skill Libraries
from Heterogeneous Scientific Resources. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.03964 (2026).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.03964
[37] 
Kijung Shin, Amol Ghoting, Myunghwan Kim, and Hema Raghavan. 2019. SWeG:
Lossless and Lossy Summarization of Web-Scale Graphs. In Proceedings of The
Web Conference. 1679–1690. doi:10.1145/3308558.3313402
[38] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
Shunyu Yao. 2023. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement
Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. https://arxiv.
org/abs/2303.11366
[39] Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han,
Roozbeh Mottaghi, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. 2020. ALFRED: A Bench-
mark for Interpreting Grounded Instructions for Everyday Tasks. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 10740–
10749.
[40] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam
Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. 2021. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Em-
bodied Environments for Interactive Learning. In International Conference on
Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=0IOX0YcCdTn
[41] Weihang Su, Jianming Long, Qingyao Ai, Yichen Tang, Changyue Wang, Yiteng
Tu, and Yiqun Liu. 2026. Skill Retrieval Augmentation for Agentic AI. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2604.24594 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.24594
[42] 
Xingyu Tan, Xiaoyang Wang, Qing Liu, Xiwei Xu, Xin Yuan, and Wenjie Zhang.
2025. Paths-over-graph: Knowledge graph empowered large language model
reasoning. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025. 3505–3522.
[43] Yuanyuan Tian, Richard A. Hankins, and Jignesh M. Patel. 2008. Efficient Aggre-
gation for Graph Summarization. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD Interna-
tional Conference on Management of Data. 567–580. doi:10.1145/1376616.1376675
[44] Changyue Wang, Weihang Su, Qingyao Ai, Yichen Tang, Runzhong Qiao, Xu-
ancheng Li, Min Zhang, and Yiqun Liu. 2026. Adaptive Multi-Resolution Pro-
cedural Knowledge Compression for Large Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2606.12203 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.12203
[45] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu,
Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2023. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied
Agent with Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 (2023).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291
[46] Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. 2024. Agent
Workflow Memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07429 (2024). https://arxiv.org/
abs/2409.07429
[47] Peilin Wu, Mian Zhang, Kun Wan, Wentian Zhao, Kaiyu He, Xinya Du, and
Zhiyu Chen. 2026. HiPRAG: Hierarchical Process Rewards for Efficient Agentic
Retrieval Augmented Generation. International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (2026). https://openreview.net/forum?id=Gt4v9WBPzm
[48] Tianle Xia, Lingxiang Hu, Yiding Sun, Ming Xu, Lan Xu, Siying Wang, Wei Xu,
and Jie Jiang. 2026. GraSP: Graph-Structured Skill Compositions for LLM Agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.17870 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.17870
[49] Zhishang Xiang et al. 2026. When to use Graphs in RAG: A Comprehensive
Analysis for Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation. International Conference on
Learning Representations (2026). https://openreview.net/forum?id=i9q9xDMjG7
[50] Qinghua Xing, Yinda Chen, Yaping Jin, Zhenhe Wu, Bohan Lin, Hang Zhou,
Xinghao Chen, Hanting Chen, and Zhiwei Xiong. 2026. What Should a Skill
Remember? Quality–Cost Trade-offs in Cost-Aware Skill Rewriting for Language
Model Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.09421 (2026).
[51] Renjun Xu and Yang Yan. 2026. Agent skills for large language models: Architec-
ture, acquisition, security, and the path forward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12430
(2026).
[52] Xifeng Yan and Jiawei Han. 2002. gSpan: Graph-Based Substructure Pattern
Mining. In Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining.
721–724. doi:10.1109/ICDM.2002.1184038
[53] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and
Yuan Cao. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In
NeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop.
[54] Kun Zeng et al. 2026. Group of Skills: Group-Structured Skill Retrieval for Agent
Skill Libraries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.06978 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.
06978
[55] 
Guibin Zhang, Muxin Fu, and Shuicheng Yan. 2026. MemGen: Weaving Gen-
erative Latent Memory for Self-Evolving Agents. International Conference on
Learning Representations (2026). https://openreview.net/forum?id=vI56m4Iu4e
[56] Xing Zhang, Guanghui Wang, Yanwei Cui, Wei Qiu, Ziyuan Li, Bing Zhu, and
Peiyang He. 2026. Experience compression spectrum: Unifying memory, skills,
and rules in LLM agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.15877 (2026).
[57] Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao
Huang. 2024. ExpeL: LLM Agents Are Experiential Learners. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10144
[58] Boyuan Zheng, Michael Y. Fatemi, Xiaolong Jin, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Apurva
Gandhi, Yueqi Song, Yu Gu, Jayanth Srinivasa, Gaowen Liu, Graham Neubig,
and Yu Su. 2025. SkillWeaver: Web Agents can Self-Improve by Discovering and
Honing Skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07079 (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.
07079
[59] Yingli Zhou. 2026. A comprehensive survey on agent skills: Taxonomy, tech-
niques, and applications. Techniques, and Applications (April 27, 2026) (2026).
[60] Yifan Zhou et al. 2026. Benchmarking Skill Generation Pipelines for LLM Agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.18693 (2026). https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.18693
[61] Zijian Zhou et al. 2026. MEM1: Learning to Synergize Memory and Reason-
ing for Efficient Long-Horizon Agents. International Conference on Learning
Representations (2026). https://openreview.net/forum?id=XY8AaxDSLb
10

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
APPENDIX OUTLINE
A. Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
A.1 SkillZip Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
A.2 Sec2Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
A.3 MotifZip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
A.4 PathHydrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
A.5 ReZip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
A.6 Evaluation-facing Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
B. Additional Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
B.1 Compression Fidelity and Contract Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
(RQ5) Does compression reduce active storage while limiting downstream recovery? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
(RQ6) How robust is contract extraction? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
B.2 Retrieval Scalability and Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
(RQ7) How does retrieval scale as the skill library grows? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
B.3 Procedural Overlap and Domain Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
(RQ8) How does procedural overlap affect compression? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
(RQ9) Does compression generalize across procedural domains? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
B.4 Hydration Quality and Context Compactness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
(RQ10) How does PathHydrate balance task quality and context budget? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
(RQ11) Is hydrated context compact under the default budget? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
B.5 System Cost across the Skill Lifecycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
(RQ12) How does offline structural construction scale? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
(RQ13) How costly are task-time retrieval and rendering? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
(RQ14) How does SkillZip affect end-to-end agent cost? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
B.6 Streaming ReZip Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
(RQ15) Can ReZip maintain an evolving skill library? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
B.7 Reliability across Runs and Backbones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
(RQ16) Are gains stable across repeated agent runs? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
(RQ17) Does SkillZip generalize across LLM backbones? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
B.8 Failure Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
(RQ18) Where do the remaining failures originate? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
C. Case Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Case 1: Resolving Skill-Level Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Case 2: Preserving Contracts during Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Case 3: Maintaining Compression under Library Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
D. Experimental Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
E. Detailed Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
F. Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Section Role and Contract Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Cross-Section Signature Canonicalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
SkillsBench Task Anchoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
ALFWorld Task Anchoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
SkillsBench Execution-Context Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
ALFWorld Action and Source-Expansion Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
11

Xingyu Tan et al.
A ALGORITHM
A.1 SkillZip Workflow
We summarize the full SkillZip pipeline in Algorithm 1. The work-
flow first builds a raw section graph, then compresses repeated
procedural motifs, hydrates a task-specific execution context, and
updates the compressed library when new skills or execution traces
arrive. Colored badges indicate operation types: Blue denotes sec-
tion parsing and section-graph construction, Orange denotes motif
mining and macro-compression, Purple denotes task-time hydration
and context rendering, Red denotes incremental update and risk
maintenance, Green denotes contract checking and verifier-related
validation, and Gray denotes evaluation or logging operations.
Algorithm 1: SkillZip Workflow
Input : Skill library S, update stream U, query 𝑞, profile 𝑝, budget
𝐵
Output : Hydrated context 𝐶
𝑞 
, hydration log L
𝑞 
, compressed graph
G
𝑧𝑖𝑝
/* Stage 1: Sec2Graph: Building Procedural Subgraphs */
G ← ∅, M ← ∅, B
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
← ∅, Σ ← ∅;1
for each skill package 𝑠 ∈ S do2
ℎ
𝑠 
← Sec2Graph (𝑠 );
3
G ← MergeSkillGraph ( G, ℎ
𝑠 
);
4
/* Phase: Cross-skill reuse */
G ← LinkCanonicalPrototypes ( G);
5
/* Stage 2: MotifZip: Contract-Preserving Compression */
( G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M ) ← MotifZip ( G);
6
/* Stage 3: PathHydrate: Budgeted Executable Context */
(𝐶
𝑞
, L
𝑞 
) ← 
PathHydrate (𝑞, 𝑝, 𝐵, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M );
7
/* Stage 4: ReZip: Incremental Library Maintenance */
U
𝑟𝑢𝑛 
← U;8
Z ← ( G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M, B
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
, Σ);9
for each new skill or execution trace 𝑢 ∈ U
𝑟𝑢𝑛 
do10
Z ← ReZip ( Z, 𝑢 );
11
( G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M, B
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
, Σ) ← Z;12
return 𝐶
𝑞
, L
𝑞
, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
;13
A.2 Sec2Graph
Algorithm 2 details how Sec2Graph converts one skill package into
a typed procedural graph. The key idea is to keep all execution
roles explicit: each section carries a role, input/output signature,
resource reference, guard or verifier condition, and source pointer.
Algorithm 2: Sec2Graph
Input : Skill package 𝑠 with markdown, scripts, schemas, tests, and
resources
Output : Skill procedural subgraph ℎ
𝑠 
= (𝑉
𝑠 
, 𝐸
𝑠 
, 𝑟
𝑠 
, 𝑡
𝑠 
)
/* Phase: Section grounding */
B ← 
SegmentSkill (𝑠 ); 𝑉
𝑠 
← ∅, 𝐸
𝑠 
← ∅;
1
for each candidate span 𝑏 ∈ B do2
𝜏
𝑏 
← InferRole (𝑏 );3
/* Phase: Contract extraction */
(𝑋
𝑏 
, 𝑌
𝑏 
) ← ExtractSignature (𝑏 ); 𝑅
𝑏 
← ExtractResources (𝑏, 𝑠 );
4
𝐺
𝑏 
← ExtractGuardsVerifiers (𝑏 );
𝑣
𝑏 
← ⟨𝜏
𝑏 
, 𝑏, 𝑋
𝑏 
, 𝑌
𝑏 
, 𝑅
𝑏 
, 𝐺
𝑏 
, src
𝑏 
⟩;5
𝑉
𝑠 
← 𝑉
𝑠 
∪ {𝑣
𝑏 
};6
/* Phase: Procedural subgraph construction */
𝐸
𝑠 
← 𝐸
𝑠 
∪ WeakOrderEdges (𝑉
𝑠 
);
7
for each operation node 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉
𝑠 
do8
𝐸
𝑠 
← 𝐸
𝑠 
∪ BindInputs (𝑣, 𝑉
𝑠 
);
9
𝐸
𝑠 
← 𝐸
𝑠 
∪ 
AttachRequirements (𝑣, 𝑉
𝑠 
);
10
𝐸
𝑠 
← 𝐸
𝑠 
∪ AttachVerifiers (𝑣, 𝑉
𝑠 
);11
𝐸
𝑠 
← 𝐸
𝑠 
∪ AttachRepairs (𝑣, 𝑉
𝑠 
);
12
𝐸
𝑠 
← 𝐸
𝑠 
∪ SkillMembership (𝑠, 𝑉
𝑠 
);
13
(𝑟
𝑠 
, 𝑡
𝑠 
) ← 
SelectEndpoints (𝑉
𝑠 
, 𝐸
𝑠 
);
14
return (𝑉
𝑠 
, 𝐸
𝑠 
, 𝑟
𝑠 
, 𝑡
𝑠 
);15
SegmentSkill uses headings, lists, code blocks, tool references, test
files, and warning phrases to create high-recall section candidates.
AttachVerifiers is deliberately conservative: an operation is linked
only to verifiers that can be reached through the skill order, explicit
tests, or matching output signatures.
12

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
A.3 MotifZip
Algorithm 3 gives the contract-preserving compression procedure
used by MotifZip . The algorithm does not cluster text spans directly.
It first searches within compatible typed signatures, then accepts a
motif only if its boundary, contract, and verifier paths remain valid
after replacement.
Algorithm 3: MotifZip
Input : Raw section graph G, minimum support 𝑚, candidate
budget 𝐾
Output : Compressed graph G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, macro dictionary M
/* Phase: Interface-aware motif mining */
C ← ∅, A
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
← ∅, M ← ∅;1
B ← 
BucketBySignature ( G);
2
for each bucket 𝐵
𝑖 
∈ B do3
C ← C ∪ GrowMotifs (𝐵
𝑖 
, G);4
C ← top-𝐾 candidates ranked by support and preliminary gain;5
/* Phase: Contract-preserving grammar construction */
A
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
← ∅;6
for each candidate motif 𝑔 ∈ C do7
Ω
𝑔 
← FindOccurrences (𝑔, G);8
if |Ω
𝑔 
| < 𝑚 then continue;9
(𝐼
𝑔
, 𝑂
𝑔
, 𝜒
𝑔 
) ← BuildContract (𝑔, Ω
𝑔 
);10
if BoundaryClear (𝐼
𝑔
, 𝑂
𝑔 
) = false then continue;
11
if 
SignatureStable ( 𝜒
𝑔
, Ω
𝑔 
) = false then continue;
12
if DependencyClosed (𝑔, 𝜒
𝑔
, G) = false then continue;
13
if 
VerifierReachable (𝑔, 𝜒
𝑔
, G) = false then continue;14
Δ(𝑔) ← CompressionGain (𝑔, Ω
𝑔
, 𝜒
𝑔 
);
15
if Δ(𝑔) ≤ 0 then continue;16
A
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
← A
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
∪ { (𝑔, Ω
𝑔
, 𝐼
𝑔
, 𝑂
𝑔
, 𝜒
𝑔
, Δ(𝑔) ) };17
/* Phase: Macro selection and representation */
A
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
← motifs in descending Δ(𝑔);18
/* Phase: Graph grammar rule */
G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
← G;19
for each (𝑔, Ω
𝑔
, 𝐼
𝑔
, 𝑂
𝑔
, 𝜒
𝑔
, Δ(𝑔) ) ∈ A
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
do20
if NoConflict (𝑔, M ) then21
𝑀
𝑔 
← CreateMacro (𝑔, Ω
𝑔
, 𝐼
𝑔
, 𝑂
𝑔
, 𝜒
𝑔 
);22
G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
← ReplaceOccurrences ( G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, Ω
𝑔
, 𝑀
𝑔 
);
23
M ← M ∪ {𝑀
𝑔 
};24
return G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M;25
BoundaryClear ensures that the macro exposes the same external
inputs and outputs as the source motif. DependencyClosed checks that
every cut dependency is represented by a macro port or remains
internal to the macro. VerifierReachable ensures that state-changing
operations still have an internal or downstream verifier after com-
pression. These checks are what make the macro a reversible pro-
cedural rewrite rather than a lossy summary. Operationally, an
Operation section is treated as state-changing when its extracted
contract declares an output write, a mutation of an external re-
source or environment, or a persistent tool-side effect. If the effect
metadata are missing or ambiguous, MotifZip conservatively treats
the operation as state-changing and requires a reachable verifier
before compression. The Risk(𝑔) term in CompressionGain is evalu-
ated only after these validity checks. It increases for otherwise
compatible occurrences with missing or underspecified guards and
resources, incomplete I/O bindings, or weak verifier support. Con-
tradictory signatures or verifier bindings are not traded against
compression gain: SignatureStable rejects them before scoring, so the
corresponding source occurrences remain explicit and available for
source-level hydration.
A.4 PathHydrate
Algorithm 4 shows how PathHydrate turns the compressed graph into
a task-specific context. The runtime implementation first constructs
task-aware anchors, maps them to section seeds, concentrates the
seeds with fused skill evidence, and then compiles a connected
executable context with scaffolds, pruning, filling, closure repair,
and macro-level rendering decisions.
Algorithm 4: PathHydrate
Input : Query 𝑞, profile 𝑝, budget 𝐵, compressed graph G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
,
macro dictionary M
Output : Rendered execution context 𝐶
𝑞 
and hydration log L
𝑞
/* Phase: Task anchoring */
𝑧
𝑞 
← 
AnalyzeTask (𝑞, 𝑝 );
1
Q
𝑞 
← BuildSeedQueries (𝑧
𝑞
, 𝑞);2
/* Phase: Dual-level seed fusion */
A
𝑞 
← ∅;3
for each retrieval query 𝑟 ∈ Q
𝑞 
do4
𝑆
𝑟 
(𝑣) ← DenseSectionScore (𝑟, 𝑞, 𝑣) for 𝑣 ∈ G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
;5
A
𝑞 
← A
𝑞 
∪ AdaptiveTopSeeds (𝑆
𝑟 
);
6
𝑅
𝑑𝑜𝑐 
← RankSkillDocs (𝑧
𝑞
, 𝑞, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
);7
𝑅
𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 
← 
RankSkillsByNodeMax ( A
𝑞
, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
);
8
K
𝑞 
← RRFConcentrate (𝑅
𝑑𝑜𝑐 
, 𝑅
𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 
);9
A
𝑞 
← ConcentrateSeeds ( A
𝑞
, K
𝑞 
);10
/* Phase: Constrained subgraph search */
𝑃 ← ConnectSeeds ( A
𝑞
, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, 𝑞);11
/* Phase: Scaffold repair and context filling */
𝑃 ← AttachScaffold (𝑃, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
);12
𝑃 ← AttachReachableVerifiers (𝑃, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
);13
𝑃 ← 
RescorePrune (𝑃, 𝑧
𝑞
, 𝑞, 𝐵);14
𝑃 ← RoleBudgetPrune (𝑃 );
15
𝑃 ← 
BreadthFill (𝑃, K
𝑞
, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, 𝑞, 𝐵);16
𝑃 ← DepthFill (𝑃, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, 𝑞, 𝐵);
17
(𝑃, 𝜉
𝑞 
) ← RepairClosure (𝑃, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, 𝐵);
18
𝑃 ← 
EnforceBudget (𝑃, 𝜉
𝑞
, 𝐵);
19
/* Phase: Macro-level hydration */
𝑈 ← 
ChooseMacroRenderLevels (𝑃, M, 𝜉
𝑞 
);20
/* Phase: Execution-context rendering */
𝐶
𝑞 
← RenderContract (𝑈 , 𝑝, 𝐵);21
L
𝑞 
← RecordHydration (𝑞, 𝑧
𝑞
, 𝑃, 𝑈 , 𝐶
𝑞
, M, 𝜉
𝑞 
);
22
return 𝐶
𝑞
, L
𝑞 
;23
AttachScaffold adds the same-skill input, precondition, resource,
failure, verifier, and output companions around selected operations.
BreadthFill uses fused skill-level evidence to cover multi-skill tasks,
while DepthFill uses remaining budget to add useful sections from
the dominant skill. Both filling procedures return early once the
selected context covers the task anchors, closes required dependen-
cies, and keeps a verifier reachable; they do not exhaust the remain-
ing budget by default. RepairClosure restores pruned dependencies
13

Xingyu Tan et al.
or verifier hooks when possible and records any infeasible role in
𝜉
𝑞 
. ChooseMacroRenderLevels keeps the original progressive-hydration
interface: a macro can be rendered as name, contract, outline, or
full source when its contract is sufficient.
A.5 ReZip
Algorithm 5 maintains the compressed library under two update
signals. New skills are assimilated through existing macros before
residual motifs are considered for promotion; execution traces re-
vise macros that repeatedly require expansion or cause downstream
failures.
Algorithm 5: ReZip
Input : Library state Z
𝑡 
= ( G
𝑡
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M
𝑡 
, B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
, Σ
𝑡 
), update event 𝑢
𝑡
Output : Updated library state Z
𝑡 +1
if 𝑢
𝑡 
is a new skill package then1
/* Phase: New-skill assimilation */
ℎ
𝑢
𝑡 
← Sec2Graph (𝑢
𝑡 
);
2
Ω ← MatchMacros (ℎ
𝑢
𝑡 
, M
𝑡 
);3
(ℎ
′
𝑢
𝑡 
, R
𝑢
𝑡 
) ← 
AssimilateSkill (ℎ
𝑢
𝑡 
, Ω);4
G
𝑡
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
← 
InsertSkill ( G
𝑡
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, ℎ
′
𝑢
𝑡 
);
5
B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
← B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
∪ R
𝑢
𝑡 
;6
for each residual motif 𝑟 ∈ B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
do7
if supp
𝑡 
(𝑟 ) ≥ 𝑚 and Δ(𝑟 ) > 0 and Valid
𝜒 
(𝑟 ) then8
𝑀
𝑟 
← CreateMacro (𝑟, B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
);9
M
𝑡 
← M
𝑡 
∪ {𝑀
𝑟 
};10
G
𝑡
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
← 
ReplaceOccurrences ( G
𝑡
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, 𝑟, 𝑀
𝑟 
);
11
B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
← B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
\ Occ
𝑡 
(𝑟 );12
if 𝑢
𝑡 
is an execution trace then13
/* Phase: Execution-aware macro revision */
Σ
𝑡 
← 
UpdateMacroStats (Σ
𝑡 
, M
𝑡 
, 𝑢
𝑡 
);
14
for each macro 𝑀 ∈ M
𝑡 
do15
𝜌
𝑡 
(𝑀 ) ← MacroRisk (Σ
𝑡 
(𝑀 ) );16
if 𝜌
𝑡 
(𝑀 ) ≥ 𝜂 then17
( G
𝑡
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M
𝑡 
, Σ
𝑡 
) ← 
ReviseMacro (𝑀, G
𝑡
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M
𝑡 
, Σ
𝑡 
);
18
Z
𝑡 +1 
← ( G
𝑡
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M
𝑡 
, B
𝑡
𝑟𝑒𝑠 
, Σ
𝑡 
);
19
return Z
𝑡 +1
;20
ValidContract applies the same port, dependency-closure, and ver-
ifier tests as MotifZip . ReviseMacro increases hydration detail before
splitting or retiring a macro, retains its source expansion rule, and
resets the evidence associated with the revised rule. The incremen-
tal update therefore preserves the same lifting invariant as offline
compression.
A.6 Evaluation-facing Metrics
Algorithm 6 describes how the framework-level logs are converted
into the empirical quantities used in evaluation. The algorithm
is intentionally placed after the three main modules and ReZip:
it does not add a new retrieval mechanism, but checks whether
the compressed representation preserves the structural conditions
claimed by SkillZip.
Algorithm 6: EvaluateSkillZip
Input : Evaluation queries Q, raw graph G, compressed graph
G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, macro dictionary M, executor Exec, profile 𝑝, budget
𝐵
Output : Per-query evaluation log L
𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 
and aggregate report R
/* Phase: Initialize per-query evaluation log */
L
𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 
← ∅;1
for each query 𝑞 ∈ Q do2
/* Phase: Execute paired contexts */
(𝐶
𝑞
, L
𝑞 
) ← PathHydrate (𝑞, 𝑝, 𝐵, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
, M );
3
𝐶 
𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙
𝑞 
← 
RenderUncompressedContext (𝑞, G);
4
(𝑦
𝑞
, 𝜏
𝑞 
) ← 
Execute (Exec, 𝑞, 𝐶
𝑞 
);5
(𝑦
𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙
𝑞 
, 𝜏 
𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙
𝑞 
) ← Execute (Exec, 𝑞, 𝐶 
𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙
𝑞 
);
6
/* Phase: Check structural preservation */
𝑑
𝑞 
← EvalDepPreserve ( L
𝑞
, G);
7
𝑣
𝑞 
← 
EvalVerifierReach ( L
𝑞
, G
𝑧𝑖𝑝 
);8
𝑚
𝑞 
← MacroExpansionRequired ( L
𝑞 
);
9
𝑓
𝑞 
← 
FullSourceFallback ( L
𝑞 
);10
𝑖
𝑞 
← DownstreamInflation (𝜏
𝑞
, 𝜏 
𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙
𝑞 
);
11
𝑡
𝑞 
← 1 − 
TokenCost (𝐶
𝑞 
)/ TokenCost (𝐶 
𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙
𝑞 
);
12
L
𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 
← L
𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 
∪ { (𝑞, 𝑦
𝑞
, 𝑡
𝑞
, 𝑑
𝑞
, 𝑣
𝑞
, 𝑚
𝑞
, 𝑓
𝑞
, 𝑖
𝑞 
) };13
/* Phase: Aggregate task and structural metrics */
R ← 
AggregateMetrics ( L
𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 
);
14
return L
𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 
, R;15
AggregateMetrics reports task success, token reduction, dependency
preservation, verifier reachability, macro expansion, full-source
fallback, and downstream execution inflation. The last five met-
rics are structural counterparts of the constraints enforced during
MotifZip and PathHydrate ; they make it possible to test whether a
compact context remains executable rather than merely shorter.
Downstream inflation compares paired compressed and uncom-
pressed executions of the same task under the same executor
seed. We use 𝐽 (𝜏) = 𝑛
repair 
(𝜏) + 𝑛
tool 
(𝜏) + 2𝑛
vfail 
(𝜏) and report
100 max{0, 𝐽 (𝜏
𝑞 
) − 𝐽 (𝜏 
𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙
𝑞 
)}/max{1, 𝐽 (𝜏 
𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙
𝑞 
)}. Macro expansion
and full-source fallback are aggregated as query-level indicators,
with fallback treated as a strict subset of expansion.
14

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
B ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
B.1 Compression Fidelity and Contract
Robustness
(RQ5) Does compression reduce active storage while limiting
downstream recovery? We further audit the storage and execu-
tion cost of graph compression on the same 1K-skill library. The goal
is to distinguish useful compression from compression that only
makes the stored graph smaller by pushing missing information to
downstream recovery. Therefore, we jointly measure active stor-
age, retained source packages, fallback expansion, and downstream
inflation (DI). Active storage counts the graph representation and
macro dictionary used during retrieval and hydration, while the
original source packages remain available only for reversible expan-
sion. All representations reuse the same cached section contracts,
so the comparison isolates representation and compression rather
than LLM extraction. As shown in Table 4, SkillZip reduces active
storage from 18.6 MB to 5.4 MB, corresponding to a 71.0% reduction,
while the 112.4 MB source library remains unchanged for reversible
expansion. The gain therefore comes from a smaller active pro-
cedural representation rather than discarding source knowledge.
Exact-text deduplication only reduces active storage to 13.0 MB,
whereas generic graph grammar reaches 6.4 MB but raises fallback
and DI to 14.8% and 14.6%, respectively.
Contract validation prevents this storage gain from being re-
paid during execution. Removing the checks saves only another
0.5 MB, yet increases fallback from 7.2% to 24.7% and DI from 2.7%
to 23.4%. Thus, SkillZip achieves most of the available storage re-
duction while keeping downstream recovery low. Appendix B.5
separately measures the local construction cost of obtaining this
representation.
Table 4: Active-storage compression and downstream recov-
ery on the 1K-skill SkillsBench library. Source MB is re-
tained for reversible expansion; DI is measured against raw-
graph execution.
Representation Active MB↓ Source MB Fallback (%)↓ DI (%)↓
Raw section graph 18.6 112.4 0.0 0.0
Exact-text dedup. 13.0 112.4 2.1 1.8
Generic graph grammar 6.4 112.4 14.8 14.6
SkillZip w/o checks 4.9 112.4 24.7 23.4
SkillZip 5.4 112.4 7.2 2.7
(RQ6) How robust is contract extraction? To evaluate whether
contract extraction supports reliable procedural abstraction, we
measure both field-level extraction quality and downstream robust-
ness under synthetic contract corruption. We first compare the
extracted interface, execution, verification, and provenance fields
against human annotations. We then remove or replace contract
fields at increasing rates to trace how extraction errors propagate to
structural fidelity, source recovery, and task reward. Figure 3 shows
a macro-average F1 of 91.6 and exact match of 84.6. Source pointers
are easiest to recover, reaching 96.2 F1 and 93.5 exact match, while
preconditions and guards are most difficult at 88.7/79.6 because
they are often implicit rather than stated as explicit constraints.
Table 5 connects these extraction errors to execution. With 10%
corruption, reward decreases only from 33.3 to 31.6 and DPR/VR
remain 96.8/95.1. As corruption increases, PathHydrate conserva-
tively expands more macros and restores more source sections. At
40%, expansion and fallback reach 41.3% and 34.7%, while reward
falls to 24.1 and VR to 77.2. The gradual increase in source recovery
limits mild errors, but the eventual degradation confirms that con-
tract quality remains a central requirement for reliable procedural
abstraction.
75 80 85 90 95 100
Extraction quality (%)
I/O signatures
Resources
Preconditions / guards
Dependencies
Success conditions
Verifier hooks
Source pointers
Avg. 91.6Avg. 84.6
93.1
91.8
88.7
90.4
89.6
91.3
96.2
86.4
84.7
79.6
82.1
81.5
84.2
93.5
F1 Exact match
Figure 3: Contract-extraction quality on the annotated subset.
Bars show field-level F1 and exact match; dashed lines denote
macro averages.
Table 5: Robustness under synthetic contract corruption.
Noise is the percentage of contract fields removed or replaced.
Expansion and fallback are query-level rates, with fallback
requiring original-source restoration.
Noise R↑ DPR↑ VR↑ Expansion (%)↓ Fallback (%)↓
0% 33.3 99.2 98.7 14.8 7.2
10% 31.6 96.8 95.1 19.7 11.8
20% 29.2 92.1 89.4 27.6 18.9
40% 24.1 81.5 77.2 41.3 34.7
15

Xingyu Tan et al.
B.2 Retrieval Scalability and Ambiguity
(RQ7) How does retrieval scale as the skill library grows? To
evaluate whether SkillZip remains reliable as the skill library grows,
we keep the evaluation queries fixed and expand the candidate
library from 200 to 100K skills. This setting separates the effect of
library scale from query difficulty: the tasks to be solved remain the
same, while the retriever must rank the correct procedural context
among an increasingly large set of similar or partially overlapping
skills. We report Ret@1, similar-skill confusion, compression ratio,
and online retrieval–hydration latency.
As shown in Table 6, SkillZip degrades much more slowly
than SkillDAG. When the library grows from 200 to 100K skills,
SkillDAG Ret@1 drops from 72.1 to 41.8, a decrease of 30.3 points.
In contrast, SkillZip Ret@1 drops from 78.3 to 65.1, a decrease of
13.2 points. The performance gap therefore widens from 6.2 points
at 200 skills to 23.3 points at 100K skills. This indicates that the ad-
vantage of section-level retrieval becomes larger when the library
contains more distractor skills.
The confusion results explain this trend. As the library grows,
SkillDAG increasingly retrieves a topically related but incorrect
skill: its similar-skill confusion rate rises from 8.5% to 48.2%. In
comparison, SkillZip keeps confusion much lower, increasing only
from 4.2% to 12.4%. This suggests that whole-skill graph retrieval
is more sensitive to overlapping skill descriptions and shared high-
level routines, whereas section-level matching can distinguish the
concrete operation, dependency, and verifier needed by the query.
The scalability results also show that compression helps keep
the active retrieval structure compact. As the library grows, the
compression ratio of SkillZip increases from 2.31× to 4.29×, reflect-
ing more repeated procedural structure available for reuse. At the
same time, online retrieval and hydration latency grows smoothly
from 18.4 ms to 248.3 ms per query and remains below 250 ms even
at 100K skills. Overall, these results show that SkillZip improves
large-library retrieval in two ways: it reduces ambiguity by rank-
ing execution-relevant sections rather than whole skill packages,
and it keeps retrieval efficient by compressing repeated procedural
structure into a compact active graph.
Table 6: Sensitivity to skill library size on SkillsBench. We
keep the evaluation queries fixed while expanding the candi-
date skill library from 200 to 100K skills. Conf. denotes the
similar-skill confusion rate (%) for each method. Lat. denotes
SkillZip’s online retrieval and hydration latency per query.
Skills Ret@1↑ Conf.↓ CR↑ Lat. (ms)↓
SkillDAG SkillZip SkillDAG SkillZip SkillZip SkillZip
200 72.1 78.3 8.5 4.2 2.31× 18.4
500 69.4 76.8 12.3 4.9 2.87× 21.7
1K 66.7 73.6 15.8 5.8 3.46× 27.9
2K 61.9 72.4 21.4 7.2 3.82× 35.8
10K 52.4 68.9 34.5 9.8 4.11× 71.6
100K 41.8 65.1 48.2 12.4 4.29× 248.3
B.3 Procedural Overlap and Domain
Applicability
(RQ8) How does procedural overlap affect compression? To
isolate the effect of procedural overlap, we keep the library size
and query distribution fixed, and vary only how often contract-
compatible routines recur across skills. This setting tests whether
SkillZip compresses more when reusable structure is available,
while avoiding unsafe compression when overlap is low. Starting
from the same 1K-skill pool, we construct three controlled variants
by injecting increasing numbers of recurring motifs into distractor-
only skills. Each injected occurrence preserves the source motif’s
role topology, typed I/O, resource family, guards, and verifier con-
nection, but remains an occurrence-specific node sequence with
independently paraphrased surface text. For every injected occur-
rence, we replace a non-target routine with the same role profile,
keeping the number of skills, section count, role distribution, eval-
uation queries, and target skills unchanged. Thus, the low, medium,
and high conditions differ in procedural recurrence rather than
exact-text duplication or task difficulty; Table 7 reports the result-
ing mean cross-skill support.
As shown in Table 7, higher overlap leads to stronger compres-
sion. Mean macro support increases from 2.3 to 9.7 occurrences,
and CR increases from 1.18× to 4.63×. At the same time, execution
fidelity remains stable: DPR stays above 99.1, VR stays above 98.8,
and reward changes by only 1.1 points across the three overlap
levels. These results show that SkillZip adapts its compression level
to the amount of reusable procedural structure in the library. When
few contract-compatible repetitions exist, SkillZip leaves more sec-
tions explicit rather than forcing aggressive macros; when overlap
is high, it can compress more while preserving dependency and
verifier structure.
Table 7: Sensitivity to procedural overlap. Macro support is
the mean number of occurrence-specific source subgraphs
represented by each active macro; canonical prototypes are
not counted.
Overlap CR↑ Support↑ DPR↑ VR↑ R↑
Low 1.18× 2.3 99.4 99.1 32.4
Medium 2.37× 4.8 99.3 98.9 33.1
High 4.63× 9.7 99.1 98.8 33.5
16

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
(RQ9) Does compression generalize across procedural do-
mains? To test whether section-level compression is tied to a
single procedural domain, we partition the 1,000 SkillsBench skills
into four named domains and a residual miscellaneous category. We
also evaluate ALFWorld as a separately structured embodied skill
library. As shown in Table 8, SkillZip improves the reported task
metric over SkillDAG in every domain where a matched baseline is
available. Reward gains range from 4.8 to 6.7 points across the four
SkillsBench domains, while the ALFWorld success rate improves
by 12.2 points. The miscellaneous category also reaches 30.5 reward,
suggesting that SkillZip does not depend on one dominant skill type.
The compression ratios differ across domains, which is expected
because different libraries contain different amounts of reusable
structure. Data wrangling obtains the highest CR at 4.21×, likely
because loading, schema handling, normalization, and validation
routines recur across many skills. The smaller ALFWorld library has
a lower CR of 1.62×, but still achieves a large reward gain, showing
that compression ratio and task improvement are related but not
identical: even modest compression can help when it exposes the
right executable context. Across all domains, VR remains high, rang-
ing from 98.5 to 99.4. Together with the controlled-overlap results,
these findings show that section abstraction transfers across pro-
cedural settings, while the attainable compression ratio is mainly
governed by how much contract-compatible reuse exists in each
library.
Table 8: Results by procedural domain. The first five rows
partition all 1,000 SkillsBench skills; ALFWorld is an inde-
pendently structured embodied skill library. A dash indicates
that a category-level baseline was not available.
Domain Skills CR↑ R↑ VR↑
SkillDAG SkillZip SkillZip
Data wrangling 164 4.21× 29.7 36.4 99.1
Scientific computing 238 3.74× 25.8 32.1 98.5
Software/web 311 2.96× 30.2 35.0 98.9
Finance/economics 147 3.48× 28.4 34.7 98.6
Miscellaneous 140 2.50× – 30.5 98.5
ALFWorld 37 1.62× 67.1 79.3 99.4
B.4 Hydration Quality and Context
Compactness
(RQ10) How does PathHydrate balance task quality and con-
text budget? To evaluate the sensitivity of PathHydrate to its
context budget, we vary the procedural-content selection budget
from 1,000 to 5,000 tokens while keeping the skill library, retriever,
and executor fixed. This experiment isolates whether additional
context continues to improve execution, or whether PathHydrate
can identify a compact sufficient subgraph before exhausting the
available budget.
As shown in Figure 4, reward rises sharply from 22.4 at 1,000
tokens to 31.5 at 2,000 tokens, as the hydrated context recovers more
execution-critical dependencies and verifier conditions. Increasing
the budget to the default 3,000 tokens further raises reward to 33.3,
whereas expanding it to 5,000 tokens improves reward by only
another 0.8 points. The flattening curve shows that performance
does not depend on greedily filling the executor context: most of
the useful procedural structure is already available at the default
budget. RQ11 next examines how much of this budget is actually
rendered for individual tasks.
1K 2K 3K 5K
Procedural-content selection budget (tokens)
20
24
28
32
36
Task reward (%)
default
22.4
31.5
33.3 
34.1
Figure 4: Task reward of SkillZip as the procedural-content
selection budget varies on SkillsBench with MiniMax-M2.7.
The dashed line marks the default 3,000-token budget.
17

Xingyu Tan et al.
0 2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500
Mean rendered context (tokens/task)
Top-12 whole skills
Top-5 whole skills
SkillZip sections
3K selection target
17,384
6,958
1,941
Figure 5: Mean rendered context on the 1K-skill Skills-
Bench library. Whole-skill comparisons render each
retrieved package in full, whereas SkillZip hydrates
dependency-closed sections.
(RQ11) Is hydrated context compact under the default bud-
get? To measure context compactness under the same default
setting used in Tables 2 and 3, we give PathHydrate a 3,000-token
procedural-content selection budget and measure how much con-
text it actually renders. We compare this delivered context with
full rendering of the same queries’ top-𝐾 retrieved skill packages.
As shown in Figure 5, PathHydrate delivers only 1,941 tokens per
task on average, with a median of 1,947, even though the budget
allows up to 3,000 tokens. In contrast, rendering the top-5 retrieved
whole skills requires 6,958 tokens per task, and rendering the top-12
whole skills requires 17,384 tokens. Thus, SkillZip reduces delivered
context by 72.1% compared with top-5 whole-skill loading and by
88.8% compared with top-12 loading. The full model in Tables 2
and 3 obtains 33.3 reward with this same average rendered context.
The task-level distribution in Figure 6 further shows that this
saving is not an artifact of averaging. The modal interval is 1,000–
1,500 tokens, containing 26.4% of tasks; 51.7% of tasks use fewer
than 2,000 tokens, and 74.7% use fewer than 2,500. These results
rule out a greedy fill-to-budget behavior. PathHydrate treats the
budget as a selection allowance rather than a quota: it terminates
hydration once task anchors are covered, dependencies are closed,
and a verifier remains reachable, and expands further only when
one of these execution obligations is unresolved. Together with the
corresponding 33.3 reward, this result shows that compact context
comes from task-conditioned executable sufficiency rather than
from indiscriminate accumulation of procedural content.
B.5 System Cost across the Skill Lifecycle
(RQ12) How does offline structural construction scale? To
understand the cost of maintaining SkillZip as a persistent skill-
library representation, we separate the offline construction process
into two parts. The first part is LLM-assisted contract extraction,
which reads skill packages and produces typed section records.
Its wall-clock cost depends on the chosen model, provider, batch-
ing strategy, and request parallelism, and the extracted records are
cached after construction. Because this stage is provider-dependent,
we account for it separately and do not extrapolate its wall-clock
time across library scales. The second part is deterministic local
processing, including graph construction and MotifZip compres-
sion after the section records are available. Table 9 isolates this local
0–0.5 0.5–1 1–1.5 1.5–2 2–2.5 2.5+
Rendered context (K tokens/task)
0
10
20
30
Tasks (%)
51.7% below 2K
modal bin
mean 1,941 • median 1,947
3.4
8.0
26.4
13.8
23.0 
25.3
Figure 6: Task-level distribution of the context rendered by
SkillZip. Overall, 51.7% of tasks use fewer than 2,000 tokens,
and 1,000–1,500 tokens is the modal interval.
stage so that the graph-algorithm cost can be measured indepen-
dently of LLM inference. As shown in Table 9, the local structural
stage is lightweight for small and medium libraries: it takes 274
ms for 100 skills, 1.44 s for 1K skills, and 16.1 s for 10K skills. Even
when the library is expanded to 100K skills, corresponding to 4.77M
cached section nodes, graph construction and MotifZip finish in 178
s. This experiment measures structural construction from cached
records rather than fresh LLM extraction at 100K. These wall-clock
measurements use the single-server configuration reported in Ap-
pendix D. All scales use the same cached-record format and local
pipeline; the reported wall-clock time includes fixed initialization
and typed-bucket construction. This scaling behavior is important
because MotifZip does not perform unrestricted matching over
all possible subgraphs. Instead, typed-signature bucketing in Al-
gorithm 3 groups sections by compatible roles, resource families,
and I/O shapes before motif growth. As a result, motif matching is
mostly restricted to interface-compatible candidates, and the local
construction cost follows graph size rather than exploding with ar-
bitrary cross-library comparisons. Together with the online latency
results in Table 6, these results show that SkillZip can be built and
accessed as a persistent procedural memory layer as the library
grows.
Table 9: Measured local structural construction cost after
cached contract extraction. Values report aggregate wall-
clock time for graph construction and MotifZip. LLM in-
ference is excluded.
Skills Section nodes Graph + MotifZip↓
100 6,441 274 ms
200 10,309 436 ms
500 24,333 1.06 s
1K 48,838 1.44 s
2K 96,739 2.90 s
5K 240,080 7.78 s
10K 477,681 16.1 s
100K 4.77 M 178 s
18

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
Table 10: Local retrieval and rendering cost on SkillsBench
after task anchors are available. Online excludes provider
inference; Rendered Tok includes fixed rendering metadata
and any indivisible selected unit.
Method Online (ms)↓ Rendered Tok↓
Vector Skills 12.1 2,834
GoS 34.6 2,517
SkillDAG 41.2 3,103
SkillZip 27.9 1,941
(RQ13) How costly are task-time retrieval and rendering?
We next examine the local cost paid at task time. This microbench-
mark starts after task anchors are available and excludes provider-
side task-analysis inference. It isolates one retrieval-and-rendering
step under the same default setting used in our main results. The
reported online latency includes retrieval, graph closure, macro
hydration, and rendering, while the rendered tokens measure the
procedural context finally delivered to the executor. As shown in
Table 10, SkillZip reduces online access latency from 41.2 ms to
27.9 ms compared with SkillDAG, while also reducing rendered
context from 3,103 to 1,941 tokens. This means that the section-
level compressed graph is not only more compact, but also cheaper
to query and render than the skill-level graph baseline. The ren-
dered context of SkillDAG matches that of the skill-level unit
substitution in Table 3, confirming that both operate at the same
granularity. Vector Skills is faster locally, taking 12.1 ms, because it
performs dense retrieval only and does not run dependency closure
or macro hydration. However, it renders 2,834 tokens, 46.0% more
than SkillZip, because the retrieved unit is still a whole-skill seman-
tic match rather than a dependency-closed procedural section. GoS
and SkillDAG also render more context than SkillZip because their
selected units remain closer to coarse skill structures.
These results show the local trade-off clearly. SkillZip is not sim-
ply the fastest retriever in isolation, but its extra graph operations
are modest and are offset by a much smaller executable context.
This matters for agent systems because the rendered context is
not used once: it is often carried through multi-turn reasoning,
tool calls, verification, and repair. Therefore, a small increase over
pure vector-retrieval latency can reduce the larger downstream
cost caused by exposing broad or noisy procedural content. Online
latency is dominated by retrieval and graph traversal rather than
rendering volume; the smaller compressed graph therefore keeps
SkillZip faster than SkillDAG even after dependency closure and
macro hydration.
(RQ14) How does SkillZip affect end-to-end agent cost? Fi-
nally, we measure the full multi-turn agent trajectory, rather than
only the procedural context injected at retrieval time. For each
task, we sum the provider-reported prompt and completion tokens
across all agent turns and then average across tasks. This gives a
system-level view of cost: a cleaner procedural context may reduce
not only the initial retrieval payload, but also the number of turns,
repeated prompt context, generated tokens, and tool calls needed to
complete the task. We also record wall-clock time from task launch
Table 11: End-to-end trajectory cost on the default 1K-skill
SkillsBench setting with MiniMax-M2.7. Values are task
averages. Prompt counters aggregate all agent turns; task
time spans model inference, tool and container execution,
and harness interaction.
Metric Vanilla Skills SkillDAG SkillZip
Total prompt↓ 2,429,237 2,782,696 1,473,532
Uncached prompt↓ 78,081 76,880 62,526
Cached prompt↓ 2,351,156 2,705,816 1,411,006
Completion↓ 34,592 31,963 20,601
Tool calls↓ 32.9 36.9 28.9
Task time (s)↓ 464.7 429.7 339.0
Reward↑ 17.2 27.3 33.3
to harness termination, including model inference, tool and con-
tainer execution, and benchmark-harness interaction. This full-task
measure is distinct from the single-step retrieval and rendering
latency reported in RQ13. As shown in Table 11, SkillZip improves
reward from 27.3 to 33.3 over SkillDAG, while substantially re-
ducing the full trajectory cost. Total prompt processing decreases
from 2.78M to 1.47M tokens, a 47.0% reduction. Completion tokens
decrease from 31,963 to 20,601, a 35.5% reduction, and tool calls
decrease from 36.9 to 28.9, a 21.7% reduction. Average task time
likewise falls from 429.7 to 339.0 seconds, a 21.1% reduction. Under
the same setting, Vector Skills and GoS require 361.3 and 372.2
seconds per task, respectively, so SkillZip remains the fastest of
the five evaluated systems. Compared with Vanilla Skills, SkillZip
also uses fewer total prompt tokens, fewer completion tokens, and
fewer tool calls while achieving a higher reward. Thus, the cost
reduction does not come from weakening the task or shortening
the response at the expense of quality; it is accompanied by better
task performance. Because full-task wall time includes provider
and container variation, we use it as end-to-end systems evidence
rather than as an isolated measure of retrieval speed.
The prompt-token results should be interpreted in two layers.
The first layer is direct context compactness: as shown in Table 10,
SkillZip delivers fewer procedural tokens at the retrieval step. The
second layer is trajectory shortening: cleaner section-level context
reduces irrelevant branches, missing dependencies, and unneces-
sary repair attempts, so the agent repeats less accumulated context
across turns and makes fewer tool calls. This explains why the
reduction in total prompt processing is larger than the reduction in
uncached prompt tokens alone. Most prompt tokens in all systems
are served from cache, so the uncached portion decreases more mod-
erately, from 76,880 under SkillDAG to 62,526 under SkillZip, an
18.7% reduction. The larger drop in cached and total prompt tokens
reflects that fewer turns and fewer repeated contexts are needed
once the agent receives a more compact executable procedure.
Overall, the three cost measurements support the same conclu-
sion across the skill lifecycle. Offline construction is a one-time and
cacheable cost; local task-time retrieval remains lightweight; and
end-to-end execution becomes both cheaper and more successful.
This suggests that the main system benefit of SkillZip is not only
reducing the number of tokens shown to the executor, but also
reducing the downstream interaction needed to use the skill library
correctly.
19

Xingyu Tan et al.
B.6 Streaming ReZip Maintenance
(RQ15) Can ReZip maintain an evolving skill library? To
evaluate whether ReZip can maintain compressed procedural mem-
ory as the library evolves, we split the 1K-skill pool into an initial
50% library and ten equal, non-overlapping arrival batches contain-
ing the remaining 50%. The split and arrival order are fixed across
all methods. After the fifth batch, we introduce controlled con-
tract drift by tightening the source-grounded verifier condition of a
fixed, domain-stratified subset of active macros while leaving their
interfaces and operations unchanged. This isolates whether main-
tenance responds to changed execution obligations rather than to a
different task. After every batch, all methods are evaluated on the
same frozen query set, which covers both initial and arriving-skill
procedures.
At each update, ReZip uses only cached section records and exe-
cution traces observed up to that batch, so maintenance does not
rely on future evidence and the reported update cost excludes the
one-time LLM extraction stage. We compare it with three alterna-
tives: keeping the original compressed graph fixed, appending new
sections without recompression, and periodically recompressing
the full library. As shown in Table 12, the static graph degrades to
28.7 reward and 91.2 VR because old macros are not revised after
verifier contracts change. Append-only insertion partially improves
reward to 30.1 and VR to 94.6, but its CR drops to 2.41× because
newly recurring routines remain as raw sections rather than be-
ing compressed. Full recompression gives the strongest endpoint,
reaching 3.71× CR, 33.6 reward, and 99.1 VR, but it requires the full
recomputation cost. ReZip closely matches full recompression while
using much lower update cost. It achieves 3.64× CR, 33.2 reward,
and 98.6 VR, with only 0.22× the cost of periodic full recompres-
sion. It also responds to injected contract drift within 1.4 batches
on average. These results show that execution traces provide use-
ful maintenance signals: recurring contract-valid residuals can be
promoted into new macros, while verifier failures can demote or
revise macros whose contracts have become unsafe.
Table 12: Streaming results after ten arriving-skill batches.
Cost is cumulative update cost normalized by periodic full re-
compression. Delay is the mean number of batches required
to recover from injected contract drift; it is undefined for
methods that do not actively repair drift.
Maintenance CR↑ Cost↓ R↑ VR↑ Delay↓
Static graph 3.07× 0.00× 28.7 91.2 –
Append-only sections 2.41× 0.08× 30.1 94.6 –
Full recompression 3.71× 1.00× 33.6 99.1 1.0
ReZip 3.64× 0.22× 33.2 98.6 1.4
B.7 Reliability across Runs and Backbones
(RQ16) Are gains stable across repeated agent runs? To eval-
uate whether the gains of SkillZip are stable under stochastic agent
execution, we repeat each comparable method–backbone setting
five times. Since agent trajectories may vary across runs, we use a
paired evaluation protocol: for each run, SkillZip and SkillDAG are
paired by task or episode and by random seed. We then compute
confidence intervals by resampling paired outcome-level differ-
ences rather than only resampling the five run-level means. This
makes the test focus on whether SkillZip consistently improves the
same tasks or episodes, rather than whether one run happens to be
favorable.
As shown in Table 13, the ordering in the main results is pre-
served across all four settings. The paired task-performance gains
range from 2.8 to 12.2 points, and every 95% confidence interval
excludes zero. On SkillsBench, SkillZip improves reward over
SkillDAG by 6.0 points with MiniMax-M2.7 and by 6.2 points with
gpt-5.2-codex, with relatively tight confidence intervals. This in-
dicates that the reward gains are not caused by a small number
of unstable tasks. On ALFWorld, the gain is larger with MiniMax-
M2.7, where success rate improves by 12.2 points, although the
interval is wider because embodied action trajectories introduce
more variation across episodes.
The most conservative setting is ALFWorld with gpt-5.2-codex,
where SkillDAG already reaches 93.6 success and the remaining
headroom is small. Even there, SkillZip still improves success to
96.4, with a paired gain of 2.8 points and a significant paired per-
mutation test (𝑝 = .031). These results show that the benefit of
executable section context persists across repeated agent runs. The
improvement is therefore not a single-trajectory effect; it reflects
a stable reduction in retrieval ambiguity and missing execution
context.
Table 13: Repeated-run results. Values are mean±standard de-
viation over five matched runs. Δ is the paired improvement
of SkillZip over SkillDAG in the reported metric (reward
or success rate), measured in points. Confidence intervals
use 1,000 paired bootstrap samples over task or episode out-
comes, and 𝑝-values use paired permutation tests over the
same outcome-level differences.
Backbone Benchmark SkillDAG SkillZip Δ [95% CI] 𝑝
MiniMax-M2.7 SkillsBench 27.3±1.9 33.3±1.5 +6.0 [3.8, 8.1] .004
MiniMax-M2.7 ALFWorld 67.1±3.1 79.3±2.2 +12.2 [7.5, 16.8] <.001
gpt-5.2-codex SkillsBench 36.8±1.4 43.0±1.2 +6.2 [4.4, 8.0] .002
gpt-5.2-codex ALFWorld 93.6±1.6 96.4±1.1 +2.8 [0.4, 5.2] .031
20

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
(RQ17) Does SkillZip generalize across LLM backbones? To
evaluate whether the benefit of SkillZip depends on a particular
executor, we compare it with Vector Skills across six backbone
LLMs and two benchmarks. Vector Skills retrieves whole skills us-
ing dense semantic similarity, while SkillZip retrieves and hydrates
execution-complete section context. This comparison tests whether
structural procedural retrieval remains useful when the executor
changes, and whether stronger LLMs can fully compensate for the
granularity mismatch of whole-skill retrieval.
As shown in Table 14, SkillZip outperforms Vector Skills in
all twelve benchmark–backbone settings. The gains are especially
large on SkillsBench, where tasks often require precise tool use,
file operations, or verifier-aware procedures. Across the six back-
bones, SkillZip improves reward by 19.9 to 26.2 points and achieves
2.0×–3.2× relative gains over vector retrieval. The largest rela-
tive gain appears with MiniMax-M2.7, where reward increases
from 10.4 to 33.3. This suggests that smaller or less procedure-
specialized executors benefit strongly from receiving a compact
and dependency-closed procedural context, rather than a broad
retrieved skill package.
The gains remain large for stronger backbones. On SkillsBench,
Claude Sonnet 4.5 improves from 26.2 to 52.4, Gemini 3 Pro im-
proves from 19.3 to 44.4, and gpt-5.2-codex improves from 21.5
to 43.0. These results show that executor strength alone does not
remove the need for the right retrieval unit: even capable models
can be hurt when the retrieved context contains unrelated branches
or lacks the exact verifier and dependency path required by the
task. By exposing the executable section context directly, SkillZip
reduces this burden on the executor.
On ALFWorld, the relative ratios are smaller because several
vector baselines already have high success rates. Nevertheless, Skil-
lZip improves every backbone. The gains are largest for weaker
backbones, with MiniMax-M2.7 increasing from 50.7 to 79.3 and
Qwen 3.5 increasing from 72.9 to 87.4. For stronger models, Skil-
lZip further pushes performance toward saturation, reaching 97.9
with Kimi K2.5, 99.0 with Claude Sonnet 4.5, 99.1 with Gemini 3
Pro, and 96.4 with gpt-5.2-codex. The pattern is consistent with
the main claim: section-level procedural context helps weaker ex-
ecutors by reducing retrieval ambiguity, and still helps stronger
executors by supplying compact, dependency-closed procedures
with the required verifier conditions.
Overall, the repeated-run and cross-backbone results support
two reliability claims. First, the gains of SkillZip are statistically
stable across repeated agent executions. Second, the gains are not
tied to one model family or one executor strength level. SkillZip
acts as a procedural memory layer whose main benefit comes from
changing the retrieved unit from whole skills to executable sections,
making the context both more compact and more directly aligned
with the task.
B.8 Failure Analysis
(RQ18) Where do the remaining failures originate? Under the
default 1K-skill SkillsBench setting, we distinguish procedural-
context errors from downstream execution errors by assigning
every failed or repaired trajectory to its earliest blocking stage.
Table 14: Cross-backbone comparison with Vector Skills.
Entries report reward (%) on SkillsBench and success rate
(%) on ALFWorld. ↑ is the SkillZip/Vector ratio. The largest
ratio per benchmark is bolded, and the second largest is un-
derlined.
Backbone 
SkillsBench ALFWorld
Vector SkillZip ↑ Vector SkillZip ↑
MiniMax-M2.7 10.4 33.3 3.2× 50.7 79.3 1.6×
Qwen 3.5 18.1 38.0 2.1× 72.9 87.4 1.2×
Kimi K2.5 22.4 47.0 2.1× 89.0 97.9 1.1×
Claude Sonnet 4.5 26.2 52.4 2.0× 94.3 99.0 1.0×
Gemini 3 Pro 19.3 44.4 2.3× 
93.6 99.1 1.1×
gpt-5.2-codex 21.5 43.0 2.0× 92.9 96.4 1.0×
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Failure share (%)
SkillZip stages
(58%)
Executor / system
(42%)
Retrieval
26% 
Contract
18% 
Hydration
14%
Execution
33% 
Infra.
9%
Figure 7: Failure attribution grouped by the earliest blocking
stage.
This attribution avoids counting an upstream retrieval miss again
as a later contract, hydration, or execution failure.
Figure 7 shows that stages controlled by SkillZip account for 58%
of the remaining failures. Retrieval is the largest source within this
group, contributing 26%, mainly when closely related skills create
ambiguous anchors or when the needed section is not included
in the initial candidate set. Contract extraction accounts for 18%,
with errors concentrated in implicit preconditions, resource require-
ments, and underspecified verifier hooks. Hydration contributes
the remaining 14%, usually when a tight context budget omits a
required branch or when source expansion is triggered too late.
The other 42% of failures occur after the relevant context has
been retrieved and hydrated. Agent execution is the largest single
category, accounting for 33% of cases: the executor may choose an
invalid action order, misuse a tool, or fail to recover after a verifier
rejects an intermediate result. Infrastructure failures account for
9% and mainly include environment, timeout, and tool-interface
errors. This decomposition suggests that retrieval ambiguity and
implicit contracts are the main remaining targets for improving
SkillZip itself, while executor and infrastructure failures require
better action control and more reliable execution environments.
The smaller hydration share also suggests that reversible source
expansion usually limits structural information loss, rather than
merely shifting missing context to downstream execution.
21

Xingyu Tan et al.
Table 15: Case Study 1 – Retrieval trace for header normalization with row-count verification. Skill-level retrieval exposes
overlapping packages, whereas SkillZip selects the shared operation and its required verifier path.
Retrieval unit Matching evidence Selected context Context consequence
Skill level Package-level similarity to both
skill descriptions
Full Clean CSV and Pivot Table packages Includes the requested routine, but also exposes
missing-value repair, pivot aggregation, and
competing output rules.
Section level Operation anchor (normalize
headers) and verifier anchor
(row count unchanged)
𝑀
ingest 
with file/schema dependencies and
the row-count verifier
Closes the required dependencies and verifier path
without loading unrelated downstream branches.
Table 16: Case Study 2 – Contract-aware comparison of three textually similar routines. MotifZip accepts the two CSV occurrences
because their interfaces, execution requirements, and verifier boundaries agree, while keeping the workbook occurrence
separate.
Occurrence Interface Execution Verification MotifZip decision
Clean CSV CSV + delimiter →
normalized table
Infer delimiter, parse rows, normalize
headers, and preserve row identity
Schema report and reachable
row-count hook
Accept into 𝑀
csv-ingest
Pivot Table CSV + delimiter →
normalized table
Same ingest routine; pivot aggregation
starts after the macro output port
Schema report; downstream
total verifier remains
occurrence-specific
Accept into 𝑀
csv-ingest
Formula-Safe
Workbook
XLSX → formula-preserving
workbook
Use a formula-aware resource and
preserve formulas during
normalization
Formula-integrity and
row-count verifiers
Reject from the CSV
macro; retain separately
Reversible rewrite 𝑀
csv-ingest 
keeps occurrence-specific source/port maps and downstream verifiers.
C CASE STUDIES
To demonstrate how SkillZip performs interpretable and execution-
faithful procedural retrieval, compression, and maintenance, we
present three case studies in Tables 15–17. Each case study focuses
on one key stage of the workflow: resolving retrieval ambiguity,
preserving executable contracts during compression, and updating
compressed procedures from execution evidence. Through exam-
ples involving CSV header normalization, contract-aware CSV-
ingest compression, and streaming macro maintenance, we show
how SkillZip maps task requirements into section-level anchors,
contract-compatible motifs, dependency-closed hydrated context,
and ReZip update actions. These examples illustrate why SkillZip
can reduce active context while keeping the procedural structure
needed for verification, execution, and source-grounded recovery.
The cases are illustrative constructions based on recurring bench-
mark patterns rather than additional quantitative samples.
Case study 1: Resolving skill-level ambiguity. Consider the task
“normalize the headers in a CSV file and verify that the row count is
unchanged.” Both Clean CSV and Pivot Table contain a file-loading
and header-normalization routine, so a skill-level retriever ranks
both packages highly. Table 15 contrasts the resulting whole-skill
context with the section-level context compiled by SkillZip.
Whole-skill retrieval exposes missing-value repair, pivot aggre-
gation, and competing output rules together with the requested rou-
tine. PathHydrate instead maps the query to an Operation anchor
(normalize headers) and a Verifier anchor (row count unchanged).
Section matching recovers the shared tabular-ingest routine, while
dependency closure adds the required file input and schema require-
ments. The hydrated context therefore keeps the reusable ingest
macro and row-count verifier but excludes unrelated continuations.
This case illustrates that section-level retrieval reduces both context
size and ambiguity between topically similar skills.
Case study 2: Preserving contracts during compression. Sup-
pose three skills contain the near-identical instruction “load the ta-
ble, normalize its headers, and validate the result.” The occurrences
belong to Clean CSV, Pivot Table, and a Formula-Safe Workbook
skill. Table 16 compares their interface, execution, and verification
contracts before compression.
Text deduplication would merge all three routines because their
surface forms are similar. MotifZip rewrites them only after check-
ing typed ports, dependencies, resources, and verifier paths. It there-
fore compresses the two CSV occurrences into 𝑀
csv-ingest 
while
retaining occurrence-specific source maps and downstream veri-
fier links; pivot aggregation remains outside the macro and recon-
nects through its output port. The workbook occurrence is rejected
because formula preservation changes its interface, execution re-
source, and verification contract. Thus, the graph grammar accepts
reuse only across a shared executable boundary and keeps every
accepted macro reversible to its source occurrences.
22

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
Table 17: Case Study 3 – Illustrative ReZip trace. Repeated compatible occurrences promote a residual, while execution risk
triggers controlled macro demotion.
Stage Incoming signal Contract evidence ReZip update Resulting library state
Insert A new Merge Monthly Reports
skill arrives
Ingest matches 𝑀
csv-ingest
; the
align–merge–balance subgraph is
unmatched
Reuse the ingest macro and
buffer the residual
Known structure is
compressed; novel steps
remain explicit
Promote The merge residual recurs in
later skills
Ports, dependencies, resource family,
and balance verifier remain stable
Promote 𝑀
period-merge 
Later skills reuse one verified
period-merge routine
Revise Formula-bearing tasks
repeatedly expand or fail the
generic export macro
Failures localize to the XLSX resource
and formula-integrity verifier
Split by resource family;
require full source for XLSX
CSV export remains compact;
workbook safeguards are
restored
Reuse A future CSV or workbook
query arrives
Task anchors identify the required
resource and verification contract
Select the macro and hydration
level by task contract
Compact where stable;
source-expanded where
evidence indicates risk
Case study 3: Maintaining compression under library evolu-
tion. This case follows how ReZip maintains compressed proce-
dural memory as new skills arrive and old abstractions become
unsafe. A newly added Merge Monthly Reports skill reuses the
existing CSV-ingest macro, but also introduces an explicit align
periods–merge–balance check residual. Separately, execution traces
show that a generic export macro repeatedly fails verifier checks
on formula-bearing workbooks. Table 17 traces the resulting insert,
promote, revise, and reuse decisions.
ReZip first reuses the stable ingest macro and leaves the novel
residual explicit. Repeated contract-compatible occurrences then
promote the residual without full recompression. In the opposite
direction, repeated expansion, repair, or verifier failure localizes
risk to the formula-bearing task family, causing ReZip to split the
export macro or raise its default hydration level. Execution evidence
therefore updates the abstraction itself: the library stays compact
where reuse is stable and source-expanded where verification in-
dicates risk. Across the three cases, Sec2Graph exposes sub-skill
reuse, MotifZip compresses contract-compatible occurrences, Path-
Hydrate closes the required execution context, and ReZip revises
unsafe abstractions.
D EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Default setting and benchmarks. We evaluate SkillZip on
two complementary agent benchmarks: SkillsBench and ALF-
World. SkillsBench tests whether retrieved procedural knowl-
edge helps an agent construct verifiable artifacts, while ALFWorld
tests whether the same procedural-memory design supports long-
horizon interactive execution. Unless stated otherwise, the default
setting uses SkillsBench with the 1,000-skill library, MiniMax-
M2.7, and a 3,000-token procedural-content selection budget. The
corresponding default budget on ALFWorld is 1,200 tokens. Exper-
iments that vary the library size, backbone, benchmark, context
budget, procedural overlap, or update stream state the changed
factor explicitly and keep the remaining settings fixed.
SkillsBench. 
SkillsBench [20] evaluates agent skills on container-
ized artifact-construction tasks, including data processing, docu-
ment manipulation, software development, and related procedural
domains. Each task is paired with an executable verifier, so the final
artifact is scored by deterministic tests rather than by an LLM judge.
The verifier source, excerpts, assertions, and intermediate outcomes
are withheld from task anchoring, retrieval, hydration, and every
evaluated agent; the verifier is invoked only after execution to com-
pute reward. Following Graph-of-Skills [24] and SkillDAG [1], we
evaluate all 87 tasks under the 1,000-skill setting. Task reward (R)
is the percentage of verifier tests passed. Target source skills are
used only for intrinsic retrieval evaluation.
ALFWorld. ALFWorld [40] aligns text-based interaction with em-
bodied household tasks derived from ALFRED [39] through the
TextWorld interface [6]. An agent must interpret a natural-language
goal, navigate rooms, manipulate objects, and complete the goal
through admissible actions. Following Graph-of-Skills [24] and
SkillDAG [1], we use the valid_seen split and evaluate all 140
episodes. Task reward is the percentage of episodes that reach the
goal within the common step and attempt budgets.
Evaluation metrics. We report end-task reward, intrinsic retrieval
quality, structural fidelity, recovery behavior, and system cost.
Task and retrieval quality. For
 SkillsBench, reward (R) is the per-
centage of verifier tests passed. For ALFWorld, reward is the episode
success rate. For intrinsic retrieval, Ret@𝑘 is the percentage of
queries whose retrieved context maps to a target source skill within
the top 𝑘, and MRR is the mean reciprocal rank of the first target
source skill. Since SkillZip retrieves sections and macros rather than
whole skills, we project each retrieved section to its owning source
skill and each macro occurrence to the source skill recorded in its
expansion map. We preserve the original retrieval order and remove
repeated source IDs by stable first occurrence, without additional
reranking or score aggregation. This gives whole-skill retrieval,
section retrieval, and macro retrieval the same Ret@𝑘/MRR unit.
Compression and structural fidelity. For compression analysis, CR
is the ratio between the raw active representation and the com-
pressed active representation, where the compressed representation
includes the macro dictionary. Tok is the average number of final
rendered context tokens per query. The procedural-content selec-
tion budget applies to selected procedural payloads before fixed
task headers, execution metadata, and source pointers are rendered.
23

Xingyu Tan et al.
Whole-skill methods may exceed the target budget when the small-
est selected package is indivisible, so we report measured final Tok
rather than treating the target budget as the observed context size.
DPR measures the fraction of required dependency relations re-
tained in the first compact view, and VR measures the fraction of
required operation-to-verifier paths that remain reachable. Expan-
sion is the percentage of queries for which at least one selected
macro must be raised from a compact name/contract view to an
outline or full-source view. Fallback is the percentage of queries
that ultimately require an original source section. For SkillZip, fall-
back occurs after insufficient macro expansion and is therefore a
subset of expansion. Recover. is the broader query-level rate used
in Table 2: it records whether the first compact view requires graph-
local closure repair, macro expansion, or source restoration before
execution.
Downstream inflation. We measure downstream execution infla-
tion (DI) against a paired execution using the corresponding raw
section context. For trace 𝜏, let 𝐽 (𝜏) = 𝑛
repair 
(𝜏)+𝑛
tool 
(𝜏)+2𝑛
vfail 
(𝜏),
where the terms count repair steps, downstream tool calls, and ver-
ifier failures. For query 𝑞,
DI(𝑞) = 100 
max{0, 𝐽 (𝜏
𝑞 
) − 𝐽 (𝜏
full
𝑞 
)}
max{1, 𝐽 (𝜏
full
𝑞 
)} 
.
We report the mean query-level percentage. DI separates compact
contexts that genuinely reduce work from contexts that only move
missing information into later repair.
Baselines and budget alignment. We compare SkillZip with
whole-skill disclosure, semantic retrieval, skill-graph retrieval, and
representation-level compression baselines.
Skill retrieval baselines. Vanilla Skills exposes the available skill
packages directly to a ReAct-style agent [53], providing a non-
retrieval reference for task quality and context cost. Vector Skills
embeds each whole skill and retrieves the top-ranked packages by
dense semantic similarity. It tests whether semantic retrieval alone
can distinguish closely related skills. Graph-of-Skills (GoS) [24]
obtains semantic and lexical seeds, diffuses relevance over a directed
skill-dependency graph, and hydrates a bounded bundle. It is the
closest dependency-aware structural retrieval baseline while still
using skills as graph nodes. SkillDAG [1] represents inter-skill
dependencies, conflicts, specializations, and equivalences as typed
edges, and uses an agent-callable interface for vector matches, typed
neighbors, and conflict signals. We use it as the strongest task-time
skill-graph baseline.
Disclosure and budget alignment. We preserve each baseline’s
main disclosure policy rather than forcing all methods to expose
the same number of sections or packages. GoS uses five initial seeds,
returns at most eight skills, truncates each skill to 2,400 charac-
ters, and caps the rendered bundle at 12,000 characters. SkillDAG
uses top-5 retrieval with graph depth 2 and allows the agent to
issue additional search or source-display calls on demand. Since
these policies do not map cleanly to a single token cap, we keep
their published retrieval settings and report measured rendered
tokens and end-to-end agent tokens. All methods receive the same
agent-visible task brief and benchmark metadata. SkillZip’s struc-
tured task object is derived only from this shared input; no method
receives benchmark verifier code or an excerpt of its assertions.
Compression baselines. For representation-level analysis, we com-
pare SkillZip with four compression variants. Exact-text section
deduplication merges normalized, text-identical sections with-
out checking occurrence-specific contracts. Text compression
applies LLMLingua-2-style task-agnostic token compression [32]
after retrieving the same raw section context. Generic graph gram-
mar runs on the same raw section graph with the same support
threshold, candidate-window bound, macro cap, and greedy non-
overlap rewrite schedule as MotifZip. It identifies and accepts mo-
tifs using topology and description-length gain without consult-
ing role, resource, I/O, guard, or verifier fields. SkillZip without
contract checks is a closer controlled ablation: it retains Mo-
tifZip’s signature-bucketed candidates, scoring, and rewrite ma-
chinery, but removes the boundary, signature, dependency, and
verifier acceptance checks before admitting each positive-gain mo-
tif. For the text-compression baseline, we retrieve and render the
same source sections as the raw-graph representation, then ap-
ply LLMLingua-2-style compression without MotifZip. We tune its
compression threshold on development queries to match SkillZip’s
active-representation ratio and apply the same default procedural-
content selection budget at query time. The same dependency and
verifier validators are then applied to the first compressed view.
When either check fails, the corresponding original section is re-
stored before execution. DPR and VR are measured before restora-
tion, while Recover. reports the fraction of queries requiring restora-
tion or repair. CR is measured on the stored active representation
before query-time restoration, whereas Tok and reward are mea-
sured from the final context and execution after restoration. Thus,
CR and Tok describe different stages of the pipeline.
Models and implementation. We evaluate all methods under
matched backbone, executor, and retrieval settings within each
comparison block.
Backbones and execution. The main results use MiniMax-
M2.7 (MiniMax-M2.7) and gpt-5.2-codex (gpt-5.2-codex).
The cross-backbone analysis additionally uses Qwen 3.5
(qwen3.5-plus), Kimi K2.5 (kimi-k2.5), Claude Sonnet
4.5 (claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929), and Gemini 3 Pro
(gemini-3-pro-preview). On SkillsBench, all backbones
are executed with the OpenHands agent through the benchmark’s
BenchFlow Docker harness. Every method within a backbone
block receives the same task image, tools, system instructions,
two-attempt policy, and skill-library snapshot. On ALFWorld,
all backbones use the same text-action runner. At each turn,
the runner exposes the current observation and admissible
actions, and the model returns either one environment action or a
source-expansion request. Episodes are capped at 30 environment
steps, 60 model turns, and two source expansions. The evaluated
backbone is also used for task anchoring; no auxiliary model is
substituted for decomposition or execution.
Retrieval, compression, and hydration settings. All task-analysis,
retrieval-control, and action-generation calls use temperature 0
and deterministic decoding whenever supported. Other sampling
24

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
controls remain at provider defaults. Structured task anchoring is
capped at 8,000 output tokens, and each ALFWorld action call at
4,096 output tokens. SkillsBench otherwise follows the genera-
tion limits of its agent harness. We use BGE-M3 (BAAI/bge-m3)
for dense retrieval, cap initial skill recall at 12, and retain a lower-
ranked skill only when its cosine similarity is at least 0.45 and at
least 0.90 of the highest score. The same encoder, cached embed-
dings, and cutoff are used by all retrieval methods that require
dense similarity. For MotifZip, we scale the description-length sav-
ing and the auxiliary Reuse, Cut, and Risk terms to comparable
ranges before scoring. We set 𝛼 = 0.5, 𝜆 = 0.3, and 𝜇 = 0.2; because
contract-invalid candidates are rejected by hard acceptance checks,
these coefficients rank only contract-valid motifs and prioritize
cross-skill reuse among them. For PathHydrate, we normalize to-
ken cost by the selection budget and scale the remaining objective
terms to comparable ranges. We use 𝜂 = 0.4 and 𝛽 = 𝛾 = 𝛿 = 0.2,
emphasizing compactness among subgraphs that already satisfy
anchor coverage, dependency closure, and verifier reachability.
Reproducibility, scaling, and cost accounting. We separate
offline preprocessing, local graph construction, online retrieval,
and downstream execution cost.
Runtime and cost accounting. SkillsBench is executed with
BenchFlow 0.6.2 in isolated Docker containers. Provider inference is
remote and excluded from local graph-search latency. Reported on-
line graph latency measures retrieval, dependency closure, and
hydration after task anchors are available. All local structural-
construction timings are measured on a single server equipped
with an Intel Xeon Gold 6248R CPU and 512 GB of memory. We
report elapsed wall-clock time under the same local implementa-
tion at every scale. The timed graph-construction and MotifZip
stage runs as a single process and is not parallelized across skills or
motif buckets. Model-side request parallelism does not enter these
measurements because they start from cached section records and
exclude LLM inference.
Offline construction has two stages. The first stage is LLM-
assisted role and contract extraction, which is cached after construc-
tion and depends on the provider, batching strategy, and request
parallelism. We therefore report it separately from graph-algorithm
scaling and do not extrapolate fresh extraction time to the 100K
setting. The second stage is local structural construction, which
starts from cached extracted records and includes procedural graph
construction and MotifZip. The corresponding 1K-skill local stage
takes 1.44 seconds, while the 100K result reports the same cached-
record starting point. Each input document in this timing study is
one skill package, so document and skill counts are identical.
For end-to-end token accounting, total prompt is the sum of
provider-reported prompt tokens over all model turns in a task.
Uncached prompt is the subset not served from the provider cache,
and cached prompt is the difference between total and uncached
prompt tokens. Completion is the total number of generated tokens
over the same turns. These trajectory-level counters repeatedly
include the growing interaction history and are distinct from Tok,
which measures the procedural context rendered once for a query.
We also report average tool calls from the saved task traces and
pair every method with the corresponding task reward.
Retrieval and library scaling. For library-scaling experiments, we
keep the evaluation queries and target-source annotations fixed
while enlarging only the candidate skill library. Each larger library
is a strict superset of the smaller one. Additional skill packages are
drawn without replacement from the same SkillsBench-compatible
source collection, deduplicated by stable package identifier, and
added in deterministic identifier order. We use the released Graph-
of-Skills pools at 200, 500, 1K, and 2K skills, and extend the same
nested-pool construction to 10K and 100K skills. The added pack-
ages are not paired with evaluation queries and serve only as
retrieval distractors. Across all scales, the embedding backbone,
retrieval budget, and evaluation protocol remain unchanged, so
Ret@1 and confusion changes reflect library growth rather than
query difficulty.
Repeated runs and statistical tests. Statistical experiments use five
matched runs, pairing methods by task or episode and random
seed. Confidence intervals and significance tests are computed over
paired outcome-level differences as described in Appendix B.7.
E DETAILED RELATED WORK
Tool use, skill acquisition, and evaluation. Tool-augmented
agents interleave reasoning with environment actions through
prompting [53], self-supervised tool invocation [35], or large API
corpora and benchmarks [18, 25, 34]. Beyond individual calls, agents
increasingly preserve successful behavior as reusable procedural
knowledge. Voyager [45] accumulates executable programs, Reflex-
ion [38] and ExpeL [57] distill feedback into reusable experience,
and Agent Workflow Memory [46] retrieves workflows from prior
trajectories. SkillWeaver [58] discovers and hones reusable web
APIs through environment exploration, while SkillFoundry [36]
extracts operational contracts from heterogeneous scientific re-
sources and iteratively validates, repairs, merges, or prunes the
resulting skills. Agent Skills [51] formalizes a deployable package
containing instructions, scripts, references, and resources. A recent
survey organizes this area around skill representation, acquisition,
retrieval, and evolution [59]; complementary ecosystem analysis re-
ports heavy-tailed lengths and substantial intent-level redundancy
across more than 40,000 public skills [23]. Recent infrastructures fur-
ther support large-scale creation and orchestration [17, 22], while
SkillsBench [20], SkillRet [4], SRA [41], SkillGenBench [60], and
SWE-Skills-Bench [9] evaluate skill utility, retrieval, generation,
and compatibility. Together, these studies establish skills as durable
procedural memory, although the complete skill package usually
remains the unit exposed to retrieval and evaluation.
Skill organization, retrieval, and execution. Structured skill
representations provide a complementary foundation. AIP models a
skill as a schema-validated directed execution graph with typed I/O
edges [3], while the Scheduling–Structural–Logical representation
separates skill-level scheduling, scene-level execution structure,
and action/resource evidence extracted from textual skills [21].
These approaches make individual skill artifacts more machine-
readable for execution, discovery, or governance. SkillZip instead
uses source-grounded contract-bearing sections as cross-skill com-
pression units and couples them to reversible macro rewriting
and task-time hydration. Progressive disclosure reduces initial
25

Xingyu Tan et al.
context by loading skill metadata before full bodies [51]. Graph-
of-Skills [24] and Group-of-Skills [54] then model dependencies,
groups, conflicts, or specializations to retrieve structurally coherent
skill bundles. SkillRAE [27] compiles reusable subunits, and Skil-
lLens [29] adapts retrieval across policy, strategy, procedure, and
primitive levels. Post-retrieval execution-graph systems construct
task-time DAGs after multiple whole skills have been selected (e.g.,
SkillDAG [1] and GRASP [48]), whereas SkillNet [22] connects
skills through an ecosystem-level ontology. SkillGraph [19] repre-
sents skills as nodes in an evolving directed graph, retrieves ordered
skill subgraphs, and updates prerequisite, enhancement, and co-
occurrence relations from trajectory feedback. SkillOps [33] instead
associates each skill with a typed contract and maintains a hierarchi-
cal ecosystem graph using utility, compatibility, risk, and validation
signals. Related graph-based systems use topology for multi-step
evidence retrieval, memory, and routing [7, 42, 49]. These methods
improve which skills an agent selects and how selected skills are
orchestrated. Their graph units nevertheless remain whole skills
or task-time invocations rather than recurring section subgraphs
compressed into reversible executable macros.
Skill compression and procedural memory. LLMLingua and its
extensions [10, 11, 32] compress prompt sequences, while SkillRe-
ducer [8], SkillEE [50], and SKIM [44] reduce skill context through
token reduction, cost-aware rewriting, or compact multi-resolution
representations. Experience Compression Spectrum [56] instead re-
lates memories, skills, and rules as levels of experience abstraction.
Skill-Pro [28], ReasoningBank [31], MEM1 [61], and MemGen [55]
learn or organize reusable memory from agent trajectories; recent
procedural-memory management further studies how such knowl-
edge should be controlled, adapted, and evaluated over time [2].
These approaches shorten prompts, rewrite individual skills, or ab-
stract successful experience. Cross-skill compression additionally
requires repeated procedures to remain distinguishable by their
execution interfaces, dependencies, and verification conditions.
Graph summarization and grammar-based compression.
Frequent-subgraph methods discover recurring structure through
description-length search or canonical enumeration [5, 30, 52].
Graph summarization represents large graphs through attribute-
aware grouping [43], structure-preserving summaries [16], or MDL-
selected vocabularies [13]. Scalable and lossless methods further
optimize summary construction, query preservation, and storage
[14, 15, 37]. Grammar-based graph compression [26] provides re-
versible replacement rules and supports reachability or regular-path
queries over compressed representations, while MoSSo [12] studies
incremental lossless maintenance. Accordingly, motif discovery,
MDL selection, reversible grammars, compressed querying, and
incremental summaries are established graph techniques. SkillZip
adapts them to procedural skill libraries by validating every occur-
rence against typed boundary ports, dependency closure, verifier
reachability, and source provenance before replacement, then hy-
drating the compressed graph under a task budget.
F PROMPTS
This section summarizes the model-assisted prompts used by Skil-
lZip. They correspond to two operations in the main pipeline.
Sec2Graph first analyzes source-grounded sections and then nor-
malizes their cross-section data flow; PathHydrate converts each
task into the structured anchors used for seed retrieval. The former
is performed offline and cached with the library, while the latter is
cached per task. All calls use temperature zero. This generation limit
is separate from the procedural-context budget: section-level extrac-
tion uses a 512-token output limit, per-skill normalization uses 2,048
tokens, and task anchoring uses the configured structured-output
limit. The remaining modules do not introduce hidden prompt steps.
MotifZip, procedural graph construction, constrained subgraph
search, closure repair, macro rendering, and ReZip are determinis-
tic graph operations. Dense retrieval uses embeddings over the task
anchors and section contents. For reproducibility, we separately
report the thin benchmark interfaces that deliver 𝐶
𝑞 
to the task
executor and allow targeted source expansion. These interfaces do
not change the procedural graph or its contracts.
Notation. 𝑠 denotes a source skill, 𝑏 a source-grounded section, 𝑞 a
task query, 𝑝 a benchmark profile, and 𝐶
𝑞 
the hydrated executable
context. Variables enclosed by braces are instantiated at runtime.
Section role and contract extraction. This prompt implements
the model-assisted analysis described in Section 4.1. It receives one
candidate section after source-preserving segmentation and returns
the role and local contract fields of its section node. The SkillsBench
profile describes technical software-agent skills; the ALFWorld
profile describes navigation and household manipulation. Profile-
specific demonstrations using the same schema are prepended as
user–assistant turns.
Section Role and Contract Extraction Prompt Tem-
plate
System role. You analyze one section of a procedural skill docu-
ment for an AI agent. The domain is {DomainProfile}. Extract
the section’s structured execution semantics and return one JSON
object without prose or markdown.
Execution roles. Choose one or more roles from the following
set and list the most specific role first:
intent: the overall goal of the skill; trigger: when the skill
should be invoked; input: values or parameters consumed by the
procedure; precondition: world or environment conditions re-
quired before execution; operation: an executable action, func-
tion call, algorithm step, or code block; resource: a required tool,
API, library, file, credential, or device; failure: an error case or
recovery condition; verifier: an observable check of successful
completion; output: the resulting artifact or post-condition.
Extraction rules. Use concise noun phrases for input and output
signatures. Preconditions must block execution when false; effects
describe state changes rather than the action itself; verifier hooks
must be observable strings, return values, or conditions. Do not
infer unsupported fields. Use an empty list when a field is absent.
Return format (strict JSON):
{
"roles": ["..."],
"input_signature": ["..."],
"output_signature": ["..."],
26

SkillZip: Contract-Preserving Graph Compression for Scalable Agent Skill Libraries
Section Role and Contract Extraction Prompt Tem-
plate (continued)
"preconditions": ["..."],
"effects": ["..."],
"verifier_hooks": ["..."]
}
Final user turn.
Skill: {SkillName}
Section:
{SectionText}
For SkillsBench, {DomainProfile} specifies programming, sci-
entific computing, data analysis, security, machine learning, visual-
ization, or another engineering domain. For ALFWorld, it specifies
the text-based household environment and its navigation, pickup,
placement, cleaning, heating, cooling, toggling, and slicing actions.
For example, a cleaning instruction that executes an action and
checks the resulting observation is labeled with both operation
and verifier.
Cross-section signature canonicalization. Local extraction can
assign different names to the same artifact. Sec2Graph therefore
performs a second offline pass over all signature-bearing sections of
one skill. The prompt normalizes producer and consumer signatures
without changing section boundaries, roles, source pointers, or skill
membership. Its output supports the typed dependency edges used
by procedural subgraph construction.
Shared Contract Vocabulary Prompt Template
You are a data-flow analyst for AI software-agent skill documents.
You are given all numbered procedural sections of one skill. Build
a shared artifact vocabulary so that an artifact produced by one
section has exactly the same canonical name when consumed by
another.
First identify every artifact or state passed between sections. As-
sign each a single descriptive snake_case noun and reuse that
token everywhere. For example, use periodogram rather than
separate tokens such as periodogram_object, power_array, or
lomb_scargle_result for the same artifact.
For every section, list the canonical tokens it consumes and pro-
duces, together with guards that must already hold. External files,
datasets, parameters, and environment states may appear as in-
puts without an internal producer. Sections with no procedural
data flow receive empty lists. Do not copy inconsistent seed signa-
tures from the input; infer one shared vocabulary from the section
contents.
Return format (strict JSON):
{
"{SectionIndex}": {
"in": ["..."],
"out": ["..."],
"guards": ["..."]
}, ...
}
Skill: {SkillName}
Sections:
[{Index}] roles={Roles}
Shared Contract Vocabulary Prompt Template (con-
tinued)
{SectionText}
...
SkillsBench task anchoring. At inference time, PathHydrate
maps an artifact-oriented task brief and its agent-visible meta-
data to the structured task object 𝑧
𝑞 
defined in Section 4.3. The
prompt expresses deliverables using the same signature vocabulary
as Sec2Graph and decomposes the task into ordered subgoals for
section-level seed retrieval.
Technical Task Anchoring Prompt Template
You analyze a programming or data task for a node-centric skill-
retrieval engine. The engine retrieves procedural section nodes
and assembles an executable subgraph. Re-express the task so that
its deliverables and operations match section output signatures
and operation contents.
Return one JSON object with exactly these fields: goal, a one-
sentence objective; domain, a short domain tag; target_outputs,
two to six concrete artifacts written as snake_case signature to-
kens; capabilities, three to eight concise verb–object opera-
tions; inputs, the resources supplied by the task; and sub_goals,
an ordered list of two to five steps. Each subgoal contains
index, description, target_output, retrieval_query, and lo-
cal capabilities. Use the task’s nouns and do not invent unre-
lated steps.
Return format (strict JSON):
{
"goal": "...", "domain": "...",
"target_outputs": ["..."],
"capabilities": ["..."],
"inputs": ["..."],
"sub_goals": [{
"index": 1, "description": "...",
"target_output": "...",
"retrieval_query": "...",
"capabilities": ["..."]
}]
}
TASK BRIEF: {TaskBody}
DOMAIN HINT: {Domain}
OUTPUT FILES: {OutputFiles}
The domain hint and output-file list are derived from the same
task brief and metadata exposed to the executor. Benchmark verifier
source, assertions, and outcomes are not inputs to this prompt; they
are used only after execution to score the produced artifact.
ALFWorld task anchoring. The embodied profile produces the
same task object 𝑧
𝑞 
, but makes implicit navigation, pickup, state-
change, and placement steps explicit. This is needed because an
ALFWorld goal often names only the target state and destination,
whereas retrieval must cover the complete action chain.
27

Xingyu Tan et al.
Embodied Task Anchoring Prompt Template
You analyze an embodied household task for an action-skill re-
trieval engine. The skill library contains the following action fami-
lies: navigation to a location or receptacle, object pickup, object
placement, cleaning at a sink basin, heating with an appliance,
cooling with a fridge, device operation, and slicing with a tool.
Construct the full executable action chain. Every object-
manipulation task must make explicit the steps needed to navigate
to the object, pick it up, navigate to the destination, and place it.
Insert cleaning, heating, cooling, toggling, or slicing when required
by the goal, in the order in which the agent must execute them.
Return the same JSON schema as the technical task-anchoring
prompt: goal, domain, target_outputs, capabilities, inputs,
and ordered sub_goals. Use two to five end-state tokens and three
to six subgoals. Phrase each retrieval_query using action verbs
that directly match the corresponding skill family. Return strict
JSON only.
TASK BRIEF: {TaskBody}
DOMAIN HINT: embodied household navigation
VISIBLE OBJECTS OR RECEPTACLES: {Inputs}
Both task-anchoring profiles are parsed into the common repre-
sentation 𝑧
𝑞 
. The raw query is retained alongside this abstraction,
allowing the dual-level seed fusion in PathHydrate to combine
signature-oriented subgoal matching with the original task word-
ing.
Benchmark execution interfaces. The following templates are
not additional graph-construction or retrieval stages. They specify
how the context produced by PathHydrate is exposed to each bench-
mark executor. The task statement and hydrated section contents
are retained unchanged; the interface adds only the retrieval and
expansion controls needed to evaluate progressive hydration.
SkillsBench context delivery. For SkillsBench, the hydrated
plan is written to the instruction file read by the OpenHands or
command-line executor. The template leaves the executor’s base
prompt unchanged and exposes the complete source library through
a search tool. The bounded search policy prevents the agent from
spending its execution budget on repeated retrieval after the re-
quired procedure is clear.
SkillsBench Execution-Context Interface
Use the following SkillZip execution plan to solve the task:
{HydratedContext}
A skill-search tool over the complete source library is available.
Locate the tool once. At the start, issue one or two short searches
using the required artifact, format, operation, or API, and inspect
the one or two most relevant source skills for exact parameters or
steps.
Then commit to implementing the solution. Do not continue
searching after the required procedure is clear. Search again only
when execution reaches a specific obstacle that another skill can
address. Prefer the shortest path to producing and verifying the
required output artifacts.
Task: {TaskBrief}
Workspace and available files: {EnvironmentState}
ALFWorld action and source-expansion interface. For ALFWorld,
the executor receives the hydrated context together with the cur-
rent observation and admissible actions. It returns either one en-
vironment action or one request for missing procedural detail. An
expansion request is appended to the task and recent interaction
state, after which PathHydrate returns an updated 𝐶
𝑞 
within the
fixed expansion budget.
ALFWorld Action and Expansion Interface
You are an ALFWorld agent. On each turn, return exactly one JSON
object.
Action turn:
{"thought": "<one short sentence>",
"action": "<one admissible environment action>"}
Expansion turn:
{"thought": "<one short sentence>",
"expand_request": "<the missing procedural detail>"}
Use exactly one of action or expand_request. Prefer an environ-
ment action when the next move is clear. Request expansion only
when the current hydrated context lacks a concrete procedural de-
tail. Do not invent tools or commands. State-changing actions such
as clean, heat, or cool do not place an object; execute a separate
placement action when the goal requires it.
Episode: {Episode}
Goal: {TaskQuery}
Hydrated executable context: {HydratedContext}
Current observation: {Observation}
Admissible actions: {AdmissibleActions}
28
