alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2609.01622

RecEvolve: A Knowledge-Driven Autonomous Agent System for
Recommender Systems
Weidi Pan
Google
Mountain View, California, USA
weidipan@google.com
He Ma
Google
Mountain View, California, USA
htm@google.com
Shuhao Ye
Google
Mountain View, California, USA
shuhaoye@google.com
Palaksh Rungta
Google
Mountain View, California, USA
palaksh@google.com
David McPeek
Google
Mountain View, California, USA
davidmcpeek@google.com
Junyi Jiao
Google
Mountain View, California, USA
junyijiao@google.com
Arnab Bhadury
Google
Mountain View, California, USA
arniebh@google.com
Mingyan Gao
Google
Mountain View, California, USA
mingyan@google.com
Onkar Dalal
Google
Mountain View, California, USA
onkardalal@google.com
Abstract
The rise of agentic AI has catalyzed a shift toward self-iterating
systems, opening new frontiers for the autonomous optimization
of production recommender models. This paper presents the em-
pirical validation of a knowledge-driven autonomous agent system,
deployed directly on a production large-scale Two-Tower retrieval
model. By delegating the entire research lifecycle, spanning idea
generation, code implementation, offline training, and metric eval-
uation, to a continuous closed-loop autonomous framework, the
agent system executed over 40 completed autonomous training
runs from scratch. Executing these runs under rigorous production-
scale evaluations, the system systematically navigated hidden ar-
chitectural bottlenecks on the latest production model to achieve
a breakthrough ∼20% relative improvement in NDCG, a gain that
translated directly to a +3.77% increase in user satisfaction in live
production traffic. Furthermore, the deployment exposed critical
vulnerabilities in standard evaluation protocols, as the agent sys-
tem autonomously discovered reward-hacking shortcuts. These
findings prove that an autonomous pipeline can dramatically ac-
celerate the pace of machine learning research and stress-test the
rigorousness of underlying experimental infrastructure, while also
exposing novel challenges such as reward hacking and redundant
exploration of failed hypotheses.
CCS Concepts
• Information systems → Recommender systems; • Comput-
ing methodologies → Multi-agent systems; Neural networks.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
RecSys ’26, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
Keywords
Recommender Systems, Autonomous Agents, LLM Agents, Neural
Architecture Search, Reward Hacking
ACM Reference Format:
Weidi Pan, He Ma, Shuhao Ye, Palaksh Rungta, David McPeek, Junyi Jiao,
Arnab Bhadury, Mingyan Gao, and Onkar Dalal. 2026. RecEvolve: A Knowledge-
Driven Autonomous Agent System for Recommender Systems. In Proceed-
ings of (RecSys ’26). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 Introduction
In large-scale recommender systems, performance is fundamen-
tally tied to the underlying modeling approach, where structural
architectures and low-level hyperparameters must be precisely
aligned. However, manually optimizing these vast search spaces
is resource-intensive. Due to human bandwidth constraints, these
model configurations are rarely revisited post-launch, leading to
architectural ossification.
Beyond the constraints of manual tuning, human researchers are
fundamentally limited by their capacity to synthesize the burgeon-
ing volume of machine learning literature. Furthermore, manual
optimization often fails to account for the intricate coupling be-
tween model components—such as the delicate interdependence
between architecture and optimizer settings—which is easily over-
looked under human supervision. In contrast, an autonomous agent
can operate continuously, exploring these multi-dimensional de-
pendencies and a broader spectrum of methodologies at a pace and
granularity unattainable by human teams.
Building on recent progress in LLMs and agent tools, we deployed
a continuous autonomous research system within our infrastruc-
ture. Our ultimate goal is to shift from manual, human-driven ex-
perimental iterations to an autonomous, closed-loop optimization
pipeline, where humans remain in the loop as strategic observers
and high-level innovators. We deployed the framework directly
onto an existing, mature large-scale production Two-Tower re-
trieval model. The system sustains a continuous iteration cycle,
arXiv:2609.01622v1 [cs.IR] 20 Jul 2026

RecSys ’26, September 28–October 2, 2026, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA Weidi Pan et al.
automating the entire research lifecycle: Propose Idea → Imple-
ment Code → Run Offline Training → Evaluate → Loop. This
automation not only accelerates discovery but also allows human
researchers to shift their focus from tedious execution to conceptual
innovation and the exploration of fundamentally new paradigms.
Crucially, this research led to candidates that proved to improve
online performance in live production traffic.
Figure 1: The High-Level Autonomous Research Lifecycle.
The framework is organized as a continuous, clockwise cir-
cular pipeline consisting of four core phases: (1) Hypothe-
sis Formulation, where the system analyzes current model
bottlenecks and proposes structured architectural modifica-
tions; (2) Pre-execution Validation, acting as a quality gate to
verify the feasibility of the proposal before committing re-
sources; (3) Automated Implementation, where abstract ideas
are translated into source code within isolated branches; and
(4) Empirical Evaluation & Synthesis, where training is exe-
cuted, and findings are synthesized to update the centralized
Knowledge Base, completing the self-evolving loop.
2 Related Work
In various fields, self-driven autonomous systems are starting to ap-
pear, creating an environment of continuous execution that moves
beyond static tool use. Early pioneers focused on software engineer-
ing automation, such as OpenAI’s work on harness engineering for
Codex in an agent-first world [6] and Anthropic’s exploration of
building a C compiler with a team of parallel Claudes [7]. These
works exploit how multi-agent teams can orchestrate complex,
multi-step, long-running workflows autonomously and stably.
More recently, these concepts have been applied directly to ma-
chine learning training and architecture discovery. Andrej Karpa-
thy’s AutoResearch [1] pioneered sandboxed environments where
an LLM is given control over a training script, evaluating hy-
potheses iteratively via standard version control. Similarly, Clau-
dini [2] discovers state-of-the-art adversarial attack algorithms,
while Aletheia [5] demonstrates capabilities in autonomous mathe-
matics research.
A rapidly growing branch of this domain focuses specifically
on Machine Learning Engineering (MLE) agents that automate
the end-to-end ML pipeline. Spurred by comprehensive evaluation
frameworks like MLE-Bench [11], recent autonomous systems such
as MLE-STAR [12], ML-Master 2.0 [13], and Gome [14] have made
significant strides in long-horizon ML tasks through targeted refine-
ment and continuous cognitive accumulation. Most relevant to our
domain is the recent introduction of self-evolving recommendation
systems by Wang et al. [10], which utilizes dual offline and online
LLM agents to autonomously generate, train, and deploy complex
model optimizations. RecEvolve distinguishes itself through a state-
less multi-agent hierarchy that prevents long-horizon context drift,
alongside version-control rollbacks to govern operational failure
modes like reward hacking.
While many earlier works emphasize algorithm complexity, they
often operate on smaller-scale models with simpler codebases and
shorter training times, relying on more straightforward training
environments. Building upon the foundation of recent MLE agents
and production-oriented frameworks [10], our work targets indus-
trial Recommender Systems (RecSys) at an even larger production
scale. Instead of local, single-machine sandboxes, our agent system
integrates directly into distributed warehouse computing infras-
tructures. We replace local, short training probes with rigorous
production-scale evaluations and experiment on live user traffic
instead of static text datasets. We prove that a continuous, au-
tonomous agent system can move beyond small-scale architecture
tuning into rigorous, large-scale system optimization.
3 System Architecture
The core focus of our framework lies in its Knowledge-Driven Or-
chestration (see Figure 1). In contrast to static scripts or grid search,
the system operates as a multi-agent loop driven by a high-level
Domain-Knowledge Directive that encapsulates RecSys domain
knowledge, error-handling logic, and environmental awareness.
While Figure 1 presents this high-level lifecycle, the actual execu-
tion is realized through a multi-agent architecture coordinated by
a central Orchestrator (see Figure 2). This system delegates spe-
cific tasks to specialized subagents (e.g., Ideator, Critic, and Coding
Agent) that interact to drive the research loop forward.
Figure 2: Multi-Agent Orchestration Framework. The sys-
tem consists of a central Orchestrator that delegates tasks
to specialized subagents (Ideator, Critic, Coding Agent). The
Ideator and Critic form a tight proposal-review loop, while
the Coding Agent interacts with the execution environment
to implement approved ideas.

RecEvolve: A Knowledge-Driven Autonomous Agent System for Recommender Systems RecSys ’26, September 28–October 2, 2026, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
3.1 Problem Formulation
We formalize the continuous architectural discovery problem as
follows. Let D be the production dataset and M be the massive,
discrete space of all valid model architectures. Evaluating the perfor-
mance of a model 𝑀 ∈ M requires a costly training and evaluation
process, yielding a metric 𝑓 (𝑀, D). The ultimate objective is to
find the optimal model 𝑀
∗ 
∈ M that maximizes this metric:
𝑀
∗ 
= arg max
𝑀 ∈ M 
𝑓 (𝑀, D) (1)
Given the prohibitive cost of evaluating 𝑓 for all 𝑀, exhaustive
search is intractable, aligning this with the broader challenges in
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [9] and Bayesian Optimization
[8]. Our system introduces a finite knowledge base K (containing
RecSys domain knowledge, historical results, and search heuristics).
The autonomous agent system learns a search policy 𝜋 conditioned
on K to generate a sequence of candidate models {𝑀
𝑡 
} that itera-
tively approach 𝑀
∗
:
𝑀
𝑡 
← 𝜋 (K
𝑡 
, {𝑀
1
, . . . , 𝑀
𝑡 −1 
}) (2)
where the knowledge base K
𝑡 
is dynamically updated with feedback
from the evaluation of previous candidates.
3.2 
The Autonomous Agent System Framework
To practically realize the search policy 𝜋 while sustaining long-
running discovery sessions without suffering from context pollution
or a shortage of quality ideas, the autonomous agent system is engi-
neered to seamlessly transition between planning, implementation,
and execution phases by orchestrating specialized subagents. This
holistic agentic design allows the ideation process to be highly flex-
ible: experimental hypotheses can be self-generated, autonomously
sourced from recent literature, or explicitly provided by human
engineers via a prioritized Hypothesis Backlog.
Crucially, to ensure robustness and prevent context degradation
over long execution horizons, our framework adheres to a stateless
subagent design. Instead of maintaining independent memory,
subagents operate statelessly. The central Orchestrator retains the
master state of the research session. When delegating a task, the
Orchestrator explicitly injects all required context, domain knowl-
edge, and relevant historical results into the message payload. This
on-demand context injection prevents subagents from suffering
from prompt accumulation and ensures that every decision is made
with complete, isolated, and up-to-date information.
3.3 State Management and Execution Isolation
To ensure execution isolation and robust state management, the run-
time maintains a strict shared filesystem structure that acts as both
a persistence and communication layer. The system utilizes a cen-
tralized directory for global state (such as the prioritized idea queue
and aggregated results) and isolated, thread-specific workspaces
for each individual experiment. Within each thread workspace, the
runtime meticulously tracks the entire lifecycle of an idea, record-
ing the initial specification, review critiques, execution manifests
(including job IDs), and post-run analysis reports. This structured
approach prevents concurrent execution tracks from interfering
with one another and enables seamless session recovery.
Algorithm 1 Knowledge-Driven Autonomous Research Loop
Require: Base Model 𝑀
0
, Knowledge Base K, Idea Queue Q
Ensure: Optimized Architectural Configuration 𝑀
∗
1: Procedure InitializeSession:
2: Audit 𝑀
0 
→ {Φ
𝑁 𝑆 
, Φ
𝐴𝑢𝑥 
} 
{Extract metrics via static analysis}
3: 𝑀
∗ 
← EstablishBaseline(𝑀
0
) {Initial benchmark}
4: 𝜏 ← Evaluate(𝑀
∗
, Φ
𝑁 𝑆 
) {Set performance threshold}
5: loop
6: 𝐼
𝑡 
← ProposeHypothesis(Q, K, History) 
{Policy 𝜋:
Knowledge-driven selection}
7: 𝑀
𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 
← AtomicModify(𝑀
∗
, 𝐼
𝑡 
) 
{Modify model configura-
tion}
8: if ¬Verify(𝑀
𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 
) then
9: VCS_Rollback() and continue
10: end if
11: 𝐼𝐷
𝑒𝑥𝑝 
← CreateBranch(𝑀
𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 
) {Snapshot isolation}
12: SubmitJob(𝐼𝐷
𝑒𝑥𝑝 
) → Compute Cluster
13: Wait for JobStatus(𝐼𝐷
𝑒𝑥𝑝 
) ∈ {SUCCESS, FAILED}
14: if JobStatus = FAILED then
15: Feedback ← AnalyzeLogs(𝐼𝐷
𝑒𝑥𝑝 
) 
{Detect HBM/OOM or
failures}
16: K ← K ∪ {Feedback} 
{Update environmental awareness}
17: VCS_Rollback() and continue
18: end if
19: 𝛾 ← ExtractMetrics(𝐼𝐷
𝑒𝑥𝑝 
, Φ
𝑁 𝑆 
, Φ
𝐴𝑢𝑥 
) {Audit via evalua-
tion suite}
20: if 𝛾 (Φ
𝑁 𝑆 
) > 𝜏 + 𝜖 and 𝛾 (Φ
𝐴𝑢𝑥 
) ≥ Threshold then
21: 𝑀
∗ 
← 𝑀
𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 
, 𝜏 ← 𝛾 (Φ
𝑁 𝑆 
) {Sustained architectural gain}
22: VCS_Commit() and Log KEEP in Results Log
23: else
24: VCS_Rollback() {Aggressive regression pruning}
25: end if
26: CleanupLocalArtifacts(𝐼𝐷
𝑒𝑥𝑝 
)
27: end loop
3.4 Formalizing the Autonomous Execution
Loop
The core of our system is an asynchronous, state-aware research
loop that manages the entire experimental lifecycle to iteratively
execute the search policy 𝜋 (2) toward approximating the optimal
configuration 𝑀
∗ 
(1). As illustrated in Algorithm 1, the system
interacts directly with the production Version Control System (VCS)
and distributed cluster via specialized tools and APIs.
4 Experimental Setup
To empirically validate the autonomous agent system, we targeted
a large-scale production two-tower model used for retrieval.
• Computing Resources: Experiments were deployed on
distributed TPU clusters.
• Evaluation Protocol: To ensure high throughput while
maintaining stringent production standards, initial short-
horizon probes were validated against full 2M-step offline
training runs.

RecSys ’26, September 28–October 2, 2026, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA Weidi Pan et al.
• Metrics: The evaluation utilized a comprehensive suite of
sorting and retrieval metrics, primarily focusing on NDCG,
MRR, and Recall @ K (𝐾 = 1, 5, 50, 200).
5 Results & Discussion
The autonomous agent system demonstrated relentless high-throughput
execution, parallelizing exploration across 5 concurrent threads. In
total, it completed 41 distinct autonomous experiments in approxi-
mately 2 days, with each individual run requiring over 3 hours of
compute time.
5.1 The Architectural Optimization Trajectory
Table 1: Final Production Performance Comparison.
Model Configuration NDCG@50 % Gain MRR@50
Baseline Model (0) 0.4796 - 0.3514
Learnable Temp (2) 0.4996 +4.2% 0.3626
Wt-Weighted (18) 0.5529 +15.3% 0.4173
The Winner (40) 0.5751 +19.9% 0.4440
Figure 3: The Architectural Evolution Trajectory. This step-
graph illustrates the compounding performance improve-
ments across autonomous rounds. Explicit callouts highlight
crucial paradigm shifts discovered by the system, such as
the introduction of Learnable Temperature (2), Watch-Time
Weighting (Idea 18), and Cosine Decay (Idea 40).
As detailed in Table 1 and Figure 3, the system successfully
navigated the search space to compound gains across multiple
dimensions:
• Temperature Tuning: Initial gains were realized by mak-
ing the temperature in the contrastive loss a learnable pa-
rameter (Idea 2), which was further refined by predicting
query-dependent temperature from user features (Idea 6).
• Watch-Time Weighting: The most significant breakthrough
occurred with the introduction of Watch-Time Weighted
Contrastive Loss (Idea 18). This was further optimized by
using a power-law function (𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ_𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
0.5
) instead of a log-
arithmic one (Idea 23), yielding the largest leap in NDCG.
• Architectural Enhancements: The system discovered that
adding DCN V2 layers to the user tower (Idea 20) to capture
explicit feature interactions, and replacing standard Dense
layers with Gated Dense layers (Idea 36), provided consistent
improvements in representation capacity and recall.
• Convergence Optimization: Finally, the application of a
Cosine learning rate decay schedule (Idea 40) on top of the
accumulated improvements secured the champion model
performance.
Figure 4: Convergence Curves of Key Discoveries. This plot
compares the offline training trajectory of the baseline
against key winning architectures generated by the system.
Although our primary evaluation focuses on NDCG, we re-
port MAP@50 here as a dense learning trajectory proxy to
provide a granular perspective on continuous validation con-
vergence.
5.2 Systematic Reward Hacking Discovery
A crucial finding across our extended experimentation was the
system’s ability to intuitively exploit vulnerabilities in the evalu-
ation protocol. In a separate exploratory session, the system au-
tonomously discovered that drastically reducing the batch size
(from 8k down to 1k) artificially inflated proxy metrics.
Because the Two-Tower model utilizes in-batch negative sam-
pling, a smaller batch size mathematically reduces the difficulty of
the retrieval task by providing fewer negative candidates per step.
Rather than improving the model’s underlying semantic represen-
tations, the system effectively "hacked" the metric. Upon human
detection of this exploit, a rollback was executed to restore archi-
tectural integrity.
5.3 Short-Horizon Early Convergence Bias
Another distinct behavioral pattern was observed when evaluating
the system under reduced training step budgets. In these small-step
setups, the system consistently favored highly aggressive learning
rate schedules (e.g., up to 3.0) to maximize metric improvements
within the limited horizon. This observation highlights a potential
bias in autonomous systems toward "greedy" short-term optimiza-
tion when constrained by evaluation time.

RecEvolve: A Knowledge-Driven Autonomous Agent System for Recommender Systems RecSys ’26, September 28–October 2, 2026, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
5.4 Redundant Exploration and Memory
Limitations
An interesting behavioral divergence between the autonomous
system and human engineers was the occurrence of redundant
exploration. In extended sessions, after several rounds of iterations,
the system occasionally revisited and re-tested architectural mod-
ifications that had already failed in earlier rounds. In human-led
research, once a hypothesis is concluded as non-viable, it is rarely
revisited unless the underlying context changes significantly. This
behavior highlights a current limitation in the agent’s long-term
memory and its ability to generalize negative results. While the
Orchestrator maintains a history of results, the subagents some-
times failed to synthesize these past failures when generating new
hypotheses, leading to a waste of compute resources.
5.5 Compounding Gains of Autonomous
Discoveries
To ensure the integrity of the system’s greedy compounding strat-
egy, we analyze the specific contributions of the key architectural
shifts by comparing sequential winners.
• Learnable Temperature (Idea 2): Provided an initial lift of
+4.2% in NDCG over the baseline, proving the importance of
dynamic scaling.
• Watch-Time Weighting (Idea 18): Added a massive +10.7%
NDCG on top of Idea 2, demonstrating the critical role of
proper reward shaping in retrieval.
• DCN Feature Crossing (Idea 26 vs 23) : Combining the
DCN V2 user tower (from Idea 20) with the power-law watch-
time weighting (from Idea 23) yielded an additional +0.64 %
NDCG, isolating the orthogonal benefit of explicit feature
interactions under the optimized loss profile.
• Cosine Decay (Idea 40 vs 36): Finally, the learning rate
schedule optimization provided a +1.07% NDCG boost, se-
curing the final champion performance.
These incremental gains prove that the system organically con-
structed a cooperative network of structural improvements rather
than relying on a single, isolated win.
5.6 The Ideation Plateau
Following the peak achievement in Idea 40, the system entered an
"ideation plateau" in subsequent rounds. Having exhausted foun-
dational changes, the system resorted to micro-adjustments result-
ing in a continuous streak of reverted regressions. This suggests
that while current systems excel at the systematic exploration of
a defined parameter space, they may struggle to execute intuitive
"paradigm shifts" once local optima are reached without external
human intervention.
5.7 Production Online Validation
To verify that the offline gains discovered by the autonomous sys-
tem translate to real-world user impact, the champion model gen-
erated by the system was deployed in a production A/B test on
live user traffic. Table 2 summarizes the relative improvements
over the production baseline across key engagement and content
metrics. This successful live deployment confirms that the continu-
ous autonomous pipeline can uncover structural modifications that
generalize to complex real-world serving environments, moving
beyond pure offline overfitting. Note that the negative delta for
Cold-Start Improvement indicates faster discovery time for new
items.
Table 2: Online A/B Test Results. This table summarizes the
relative improvement of the champion model over the pro-
duction baseline across key engagement and content metrics.
Metric Relative Improvement
User Satisfaction +3.77%
Cold-Start Improvement -16.50%
Unique Content +7.44%
6 Discussion and Future Directions
The deployment of a knowledge-driven autonomous agent system
in production Recommender Systems reveals several critical open
research questions and structural limitations that must be addressed
to scale the architecture:
(1) Multi-Agent Hierarchies and Context Fatigue: To over-
come the limitations of single-agent architectures, such as
prompt accumulation and "context anxiety", we deployed
a multi-agent hierarchy (ideator, critic, coding agent, and
orchestrator). This allowed us to segment the lifecycle across
specialized subagents to isolate state and extend session du-
ration.
(2) Domain-Specific Deep Research Agents: Generic lan-
guage models lack acute awareness of RecSys invariants
(e.g., negative sampling math, density). Integrating deep re-
search agents with a fine-tuned understanding of user-item
retrieval could potentially raise hypothesis success rates.
(3) 
The Online-Offline Generalization Gap: While our of-
fline evaluations often yielded "win-win" scenarios with si-
multaneous gains across all metrics, production online ex-
periments frequently exhibit complex trade-offs between
competing objectives. Investigating how autonomously dis-
covered offline improvements translate to online dynamics
and managing these trade-offs is a key direction for future
work.
(4) Off-Policy Dataset Bias: While not unique to agentic sys-
tems, relying on frozen log data defaults to learning historical
system policies. If uncorrected, the agent risks overfitting
structural modifications to reinforce historical biases rather
than learning true causal representations.
(5) 
Compute Barrier and Surrogate Pruning: Evaluating
every permutation on full production-scale topologies is
compute-prohibitive. To scale, future harnesses should em-
ploy a two-tier validation: rapid filtering on smaller surrogate
models, followed by full-scale verification of top candidates.
(6) Expansion to Automated Feature Engineering: While
this work focused exclusively on architectural discoveries
within the model itself, feature engineering remains a dom-
inant driver of performance in production Recommender

RecSys ’26, September 28–October 2, 2026, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA Weidi Pan et al.
Systems. A natural extension is to empower the agent to
autonomously generate, transform, and select new features.
7 Conclusion
This work demonstrates that the transition from manual experi-
mentation to a knowledge-driven autonomous research pipeline is
not only feasible but highly effective for production models in large-
scale recommender systems, uncovering significant, non-obvious
optimizations (e.g., Watch-Time Weighting and DCN V2 layers)
that human engineers lack the bandwidth to test exhaustively. Cru-
cially, the system acts as an ultimate stress-tester for experimental
infrastructure, actively seeking out and exploiting metric shortcuts.
Future work will focus on improving the alignment between short-
horizon proxy metrics and long-term production stability, as well
as integrating human-in-the-loop queuing to unblock the system
when it reaches architectural local optima.
References
[1] Karpathy, A. (2026). autoresearch: AI Agents Running Research on Single-
GPU Nanochat Training Automatically. GitHub repository. https://github.com/
karpathy/autoresearch
[2] Panfilov, A., Romov, P., Shilov, I., de Montjoye, Y.-A., Geiping, J., & An-
driushchenko, M. (2026). Claudini: Autoresearch Discovers State-of-the-Art Ad-
versarial Attack Algorithms for LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.24511.
[3] Lu, C., Lu, C., Lange, R. T., Yamada, Y., Hu, S., Foerster, J., Ha, D., & Clune, J. (2026).
Towards end-to-end automation of AI research. Nature, 651(8107), 914–919.
[4] Rajasekaran, P. (2026). Harness design for long-running application development.
Anthropic Engineering Blog. https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/harness-
design-long-running-apps
[5] Feng, T., Trinh, T. H., Bingham, G., Hwang, D., Chervonyi, Y., Jung, J., ... &
Luong, T. (2026). Towards Autonomous Mathematics Research. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2602.10177.
[6] Lopopolo, R. (2026). Harness engineering: leveraging Codex in an agent-first
world. OpenAI. https://openai.com/index/harness-engineering/
[7] Anthropic. (2026). Building a C compiler with a team of parallel Claudes. An-
thropic Engineering Blog. https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/building-c-
compiler
[8] Snoek, J., Larochelle, H., & Adams, R. P. (2012). Practical bayesian optimization
of machine learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (pp. 2951–2959).
[9] Elsken, T., Metzen, J. H., & Hutter, F. (2019). Neural architecture search: A survey.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(55), 1–21.
[10] Wang, X., et al. (2026). Self-Evolving Recommendation System: End-To-End Au-
tonomous Model Optimization With LLM Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.10226.
[11] Chan, J. S., Chowdhury, N., Jaffe, O., Aung, J., Sherburn, D., Mays, E., Starace,
G., Liu, K., et al. (2024). MLE-bench: Evaluating Machine Learning Agents on
Machine Learning Engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07095.
[12] Google Research et al. (2025). MLE-STAR: Machine Learning Engineering Agent
via Search and Targeted Refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15692.
[13] Zhu, X., Liu, Y., et al. (2026). ML-Master 2.0: Evolutionary and Iterative Frame-
works for Machine Learning Engineering. arXiv preprint.
[14] Author, A., et al. (2026). Gome: Continuous Cognitive Accumulation for Long-
Horizon Machine Learning Tasks. arXiv preprint.
