# Released evidence excerpt 2310.11511: on-demand retrieval with self-critique


Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2310.11511
GitHub: https://github.com/AkariAsai/self-rag

Preprint.
SELF-RAG: LEARNING TO RETRIEVE, GENERATE, AND
CRITIQUE THROUGH SELF-REFLECTION
Akari Asai
†
, Zeqiu Wu
†
, Yizhong Wang
†§
, Avirup Sil
‡
, Hannaneh Hajishirzi
†§
†
University of Washington 
§
Allen Institute for AI 
‡
IBM Research AI
{akari,zeqiuwu,yizhongw,hannaneh}@cs.washington.edu, avi@us.ibm.com
ABSTRACT
Despite their remarkable capabilities, large language models (LLMs) often produce
responses containing factual inaccuracies due to their sole reliance on the paramet-
ric knowledge they encapsulate. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), an ad
hoc approach that augments LMs with retrieval of relevant knowledge, decreases
such issues. However, indiscriminately retrieving and incorporating a fixed number
of retrieved passages, regardless of whether retrieval is necessary, or passages are
relevant, diminishes LM versatility or can lead to unhelpful response generation.
We introduce a new framework called Self-Reflective Retrieval-Augmented Gen-
eration (SELF-RAG) that enhances an LM’s quality and factuality through retrieval
and self-reflection. Our framework trains a single arbitrary LM that adaptively
retrieves passages on-demand, and generates and reflects on retrieved passages
and its own generations using special tokens, called reflection tokens. Generating
reflection tokens makes the LM controllable during the inference phase, enabling it
to tailor its behavior to diverse task requirements. Experiments show that SELF-
RAG (7B and 13B parameters) significantly outperforms state-of-the-art LLMs
and retrieval-augmented models on a diverse set of tasks. Specifically, SELF-RAG
outperforms ChatGPT and retrieval-augmented Llama2-chat on Open-domain QA,
reasoning and fact verification tasks, and it shows significant gains in improving
factuality and citation accuracy for long-form generations relative to these models.
1
1 INTRODUCTION
State-of-the-art LLMs continue to struggle with factual errors (Mallen et al., 2023; Min et al., 2023)
despite their increased model and data scale (Ouyang et al., 2022). Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) methods (Figure 1 left; Lewis et al. 2020; Guu et al. 2020) augment the input of LLMs
with relevant retrieved passages, reducing factual errors in knowledge-intensive tasks (Ram et al.,
2023; Asai et al., 2023a). However, these methods may hinder the versatility of LLMs or introduce
unnecessary or off-topic passages that lead to low-quality generations (Shi et al., 2023) since they
retrieve passages indiscriminately regardless of whether the factual grounding is helpful. Moreover,
the output is not guaranteed to be consistent with retrieved relevant passages (Gao et al., 2023) since
the models are not explicitly trained to leverage and follow facts from provided passages. This
work introduces Self-Reflective Retrieval-augmented Generation (SELF-RAG) to improve an
LLM’s generation quality, including its factual accuracy without hurting its versatility, via on-demand
retrieval and self-reflection. We train an arbitrary LM in an end-to-end manner to learn to reflect on
its own generation process given a task input by generating both task output and intermittent special
tokens (i.e., reflection tokens). Reflection tokens are categorized into retrieval and critique tokens to
indicate the need for retrieval and its generation quality respectively (Figure 1 right). In particular,
given an input prompt and preceding generations, SELF-RAG first determines if augmenting the
continued generation with retrieved passages would be helpful. If so, it outputs a retrieval token that
calls a retriever model on demand (Step 1). Subsequently, SELF-RAG concurrently processes multiple
retrieved passages, evaluating their relevance and then generating corresponding task outputs (Step
2). It then generates critique tokens to criticize its own output and choose best one (Step 3) in terms
of factuality and overall quality. This process differs from conventional RAG (Figure 1 left), which
1
Our code and trained models are available at https://selfrag.github.io/.
1
arXiv:2310.11511v1 [cs.CL] 17 Oct 2023

Preprint.
Step 1: Retrieve K documents
California was named after a fictional
island in a Spanish book.
Prompt How did US states get their names?
US states got their names from a variety of
sources. Eleven states are named after an
individual person (e.g, California was named
after Christopher Columbus). Some states
including Texas and Utah, are named after
Native American tribe.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) 
Ours: Self-reflective Retrieval-Augmented Generation (Self-RAG)
Popular names by states. In Texas,
Emma is a popular baby name.
Of the fifty states, eleven are named
after an individual person.
Prompt How did US states get their names? +
Step 2: Prompt LM with K docs and generate
Retriever
LM
Prompt How did US states get their names?
US states got their names from a variety of sources. 
Retrieve
Step 1: Retrieve on demand
Prompt +
11 of 50 state names
Relevant
Step 2: Generate segment in parallel
come from persons. 
Supported
Irrelevant 
Texas is named
after a Native American tribe.
Step 3: Critique outputs and select best segment
origins in a 16th-century novel
Las Sergas de Esplandián.
California's name has its
Relevant
Partially
US states got their names from a variety of sources. 11 of 50
states names are come from persons. 26 states are named
after Native Americans, including Utah.
Prompt: Write an essay of your best summer vacation 
Prompt: Write an essay of your best summer vacation
No Retrieval 
My best summer vacation is when my family and I embarked on a road trip along …
My best…
>
Repeat.…
No information in passages
Contradictory
>
Prompt + 
Prompt +
Retrieve
Figure 1: Overview of SELF-RAG. SELF-RAG learns to retrieve, critique, and generate text passages
to enhance overall generation quality, factuality, and verifiability.
consistently retrieves a fixed number of documents for generation regardless of the retrieval necessity
(e.g., the bottom figure example does not require factual knowledge) and never second visits the
generation quality. Moreover, SELF-RAG provides citations for each segment with its self-assessment
of whether the output is supported by the passage, leading to easier fact verification.
SELF-RAG trains an arbitrary LM to generate text with reflection tokens by unifying them as the
next token prediction from the expanded model vocabulary. We train our generator LM on a diverse
collection of text interleaved with reflection tokens and retrieved passages. Reflection tokens, inspired
by reward models used in reinforcement learning (Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al., 2022), are
inserted offline into the original corpus by a trained critic model. This eliminates the need to host a
critic model during training, reducing overhead. The critic model, in part, is supervised on a dataset
of input, output, and corresponding reflection tokens collected by prompting a propriety LM (i.e.,
GPT-4; OpenAI 2023). While we draw inspiration from studies that use control tokens to start and
guide text generation (Lu et al., 2022; Keskar et al., 2019), our trained LM uses critique tokens to
assess its own predictions after each generated segment as an integral part of the generation output.
SELF-RAG further enables a customizable decoding algorithm to satisfy hard or soft constraints,
which are defined by reflection token predictions. In particular, our inference-time algorithm enables
us to (1) flexibly adjust retrieval frequency for different downstream applications and (2) customize
models’ behaviors to user preferences by leveraging reflection tokens through segment-level beam
search using the weighted linear sum of the reflection token probabilities as segment score.
Empirical results on six tasks, including reasoning and long-form generation, demonstrate that SELF-
RAG significantly outperforms pre-trained and instruction-tuned LLMs that have more parameters and
widely adopted RAG approaches with higher citation accuracy. In particular, SELF-RAG outperforms
retrieval-augmented ChatGPT on four tasks, Llama2-chat (Touvron et al., 2023) and Alpaca (Dubois
et al., 2023) on all tasks. Our analysis demonstrates the effectiveness of training and inference with
reflection tokens for overall performance improvements as well as test-time model customizations
(e.g., balancing the trade-off between citation previsions and completeness).
2 RELATED WORK
Retrieval-Augmented Generation. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) augments the input
space of LMs with retrieved text passages (Guu et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020), leading to large
improvements in knowledge-intensive tasks after fine-tuning or used with off-the-shelf LMs (Ram
et al., 2023). A more recent work (Luo et al., 2023) instruction-tunes an LM with a fixed number
2

Preprint.
of retrieved passages prepended to input, or pre-train a retriever and LM jointly, followed by few-
shot fine-tuning on task datasets (Izacard et al., 2022b). While prior work often retrieves only
once at the beginning, Jiang et al. (2023) propose to adaptively retrieve passages for generation
on top of a proprietary LLM or Schick et al. (2023) train an LM to generate API calls for named
entities. Yet, the improved task performance of such approaches often comes at the expense of
runtime efficiency (Mallen et al., 2023), robustness to irrelevant context (Shi et al., 2023), and lack of
attributions (Liu et al., 2023a; Gao et al., 2023). We introduce a method to train an arbitrary LM to
learn to use retrieval on-demand for diverse instruction-following queries and introduce controlled
generation guided by reflections tokens to further improve generation quality and attributions.
Concurrent RAG work. A few concurrent works
2 
on RAG propose new training or prompting
strategies to improve widely-adopted RAG approaches. Lin et al. (2023) fine-tune both the retriever
and LM on instruction-tuning datasets in two steps. While we also train our model on diverse
instruction-following datasets, SELF-RAG enables retrieval on demand and selection of the best
possible model output via fine-grained self-reflection, making it widely applicable and more robust
and controllable. Yoran et al. (2023) use a natural language inference model and Xu et al. (2023) use
a summarization model to filter out or compress retrieved passages before using them to prompt the
LM to generate the output. SELF-RAG processes passages in parallel and filters out irrelevant ones
through self-reflection, without relying on external models at inference. Moreover, our self-reflection
mechanism also evaluates other aspects of the model output quality including factuality. LATS (Zhou
et al., 2023) prompt off-the-shelf LMs to search for relevant information for question answering tasks
and to generate with tree search, guided by LM-generated value scores. While their value function
simply indicates an overall score of each generation, SELF-RAG trains to an arbitrary LM to learn to
generate fine-grained self-reflection and customizable inference.
Training and generating with critics. Training LLMs with reinforcement learning (e.g., Proximal
Policy Optimization or PPO; Schulman et al. 2017) from human feedback (RLHF) has proven
effective in aligning LLMs with human preferences (Ouyang et al., 2022). Wu et al. (2023) introduce
fine-grained RLHF with multiple reward models. Though our work also studies fine-grained critique
on retrieval and generation, we train our target LM on task examples augmented with reflection
tokens from a critic model offline, with a far lower training cost compared to RLHF. In addition,
reflection tokens in SELF-RAG enable controllable generation at inference, while RLHF focuses on
hu