
Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2606.05922
GitHub: https://github.com/wbopan/retro-harness

Evolving Agents in the Dark:
RETROSPECTIVE HARNESS OPTIMIZATION via Self-Preference
Wenbo Pan
1
* 
Shujie Liu
2 
Chin-Yew Lin
2 
Jingying Zeng
2 
Xianfeng Tang
2
Xiangyang Zhou
2 
Yan Lu
2 
Xiaohua Jia
1
1
City University of Hong Kong 
2
Microsoft Research Asia
Abstract
AI agents rely on a harness of skills, tools,
and workflows to solve complex problems.
Continually improving this harness is essen-
tial for adapting to new tasks. However, ex-
isting optimization methods typically require
ground-truth validation sets, yet such labeled
data is difficult to acquire in practical deploy-
ment settings. To address this problem, we
introduce Retrospective Harness Optimization
(RHO), a self-supervised method that opti-
mizes the agent harness using only past tra-
jectories. Specifically, RHO selects a diverse
coreset of challenging tasks from past trajecto-
ries and re-solves them in parallel. The agent
analyzes these rollouts using self-validation
and self-consistency, then generates candidate
harness updates and selects the most effec-
tive one by its own pairwise self-preference.
We evaluate RHO across three diverse do-
mains, spanning software engineering, tech-
nical work, and knowledge work. Notably, a
single optimization round improves the pass
rate on SWE-Bench Pro from 59% to 78%
without any external grading. Furthermore,
our analysis demonstrates that RHO effec-
tively targets prior failure modes. As a re-
sult, the optimized harness alters the agent’s
behavior patterns and sustains higher accuracy
during long-horizon sessions. Code is avail-
able at https://github.com/wbopan/
retro-harness 
and the project website at
https://paper-rho.wenbo.io.
1 Introduction
A harness enables an AI agent to complete
complex tasks by providing it with available
skills, workflows, and tools. One important
research question is how to improve the harness
continuously. Specifically, after an agent is
deployed, we aim to continually evolve its harness
* 
Corresponding author. Work done during an internship
at Microsoft Research Asia.
Validation-Based
Iterate on validation set
Improved
Harness Update
Validation Score
Not improved
Retrospective
Reflect on past trajectories
Past Trajectories
Rollout
Diagnosis
Update
New Harness
Figure 1: RHO versus validation-feedback harness
optimization. Validation-feedback methods iterate
against a labeled validation set, whereas RHO
optimizes from past trajectories in a single retrospective
pass with no ground-truth labels.
by learning from past experiences, which in turn
improves its performance on future tasks.
Prior work has proposed various methods for
evolving the agent harness (Zhou et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2023; Khattab et al., 2023; Yuksekgonul et al.,
2024; Agrawal et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2024; Lee
et al., 2026). However, these methods rely on scor-
ing against a validation set to guide the improve-
ments. In practical deployment scenarios, it is often
difficult to collect a validation set that accurately
estimates the distribution of future tasks to validate
the updated harness. On the other hand, the con-
tinuous operation of an agent naturally produces a
rich set of trajectories from past tasks. This leads
to our central question. Can we improve the agent
harness to enhance future performance when we
only have access to past trajectories?
To address this problem, we propose Ret-
rospective Harness Optimization (RHO), a
self-supervised method that optimizes the harness
through a retrospective analysis of past trajecto-
ries. This method employs the agent’s internal
self-preference over trajectories to guide the op-
timization process. Figure 1 contrasts RHO with
conventional validation-feedback optimization,
arXiv:2606.05922v3 [cs.AI] 29 Aug 2026

which iterates against a labeled validation set.
Figure 2 illustrates this process. Specifically, given
a large set of past trajectories, RHO first selects
a diverse and challenging coreset of tasks. Then
the agent re-attempts each task in the coreset
multiple times to generate parallel trajectories.
Building on this, we extract two diagnostic signals,
namely self-validation within a trajectory and
self-consistency across parallel trajectories. These
signals are then used to instruct the generation of
harness updates. Finally, by using the agent’s pair-
wise self-preference, we select the most promising
harness from the newly generated proposals.
We evaluate the effectiveness of RHO across
three agent domains that span software engineer-
ing, technical work, and knowledge work. RHO
consistently improves the agent’s performance
across all three domains. Notably, by running a
single round of retrospective harness optimization
on software-engineering trajectories, we improve
the pass rate on SWE-Bench Pro (Deng et al.,
2025) from 59% to 78%, without depending on
grading against a validation set.
Furthermore, we provide a detailed analysis
on how the retrospective optimization process
improves performance. We observe that RHO
designs specific skills and tools targeting typical
failure modes encountered in past tasks. These
components reshape the agent’s action patterns and
help it sustain higher accuracy in long-horizon ses-
sions. Additionally, we quantitatively analyze the
contributions of the diagnostic signals during the
retrospective process. This analysis demonstrates
that each step in RHO progressively isolates sig-
nals that contribute to performance improvements.
Our contributions are as follows:
⋄ 
We propose retrospective harness optimization,
which addresses the gap of improving the full
harness (including memory, context, skills, and
tools) exclusively from unlabeled trajectories.
⋄ 
We evaluate RHO across three scenarios and
show that retrospective analysis consistently
outperforms straightforward experience accu-
mulation and reaches quality comparable to
validation-feedback-driven evolution with no la-
bels at roughly a third of its compute budget.
⋄ 
We provide a quantitative analysis of the impact
of harness optimization on agent performance,
showing that gathering effective improvement
signals leads to targeted changes in the harness
and optimizes the agent’s behavior.
2 Related Work
Harness optimization. Harness optimization im-
proves an agent by editing the prompts, program
parameters, or workflow code that surround a fixed
model. One line optimizes prompts or pipeline pa-
rameters against a labeled metric, spanning LLM-
as-optimizer search (Yang et al., 2023), declarative
pipeline compilation (Khattab et al., 2023), textual-
gradient updates (Yuksekgonul et al., 2024), reflec-
tive prompt evolution (Agrawal et al., 2025), and
cross-model prompt evolution (Wu et al., 2026).
A more agentic line lets a meta-agent rewrite the
agent’s own code, where ADAS searches the space
of agentic system designs (Hu et al., 2024), Meta-
Harness searches over harness code using the ex-
ecution traces and scores of prior candidates (Lee
et al., 2026), and M
⋆ 
evolves the memory system
as an executable program, scoring candidate mem-
ory programs on a labeled validation set (Pan et al.,
2026a). Although these methods differ in the sur-
face they edit, all of them steer the search with a
labeled validation metric. RHO departs from this
paradigm, requiring no validation feedback and im-
proving the harness in a single retrospective pass
over unlabeled past trajectories.
Agent self-improvement. A second line im-
proves agents from their own past experience,
using the agent’s self-judgment over trajectories in
place of ground-truth labels. Dynamic Cheatsheet
maintains a self-curated memory of reusable strate-
gies and code snippets at test time (Suzgun et al.,
2025), while ReasoningBank distills generalizable
reasoning strategies from self-judged successes
and failures (Ouyang et al., 2025). MemMA
coordinates the memory cycle with multiple agents
and repairs its memory bank against self-generated
probe questions (Lin et al., 2026), and Sleep-time
Compute precomputes useful context offline before
queries arrive (Lin et al., 2025). Concurrent to
our work, SkillOS instead trains a skill curator
with reinforcement learning from outcome and
judge rewards, updating a skill repository from
accumulated experience (Ouyang et al., 2026).
These methods enrich an agent’s stored memory,
context, or skill list while leaving the rest of the
harness untouched. RHO instead optimizes the
full harness, including executable tools and in-
structions, rather than memory alone. Appendix A
gives a detailed comparison with related work.

Deployment
User delegates tasks.
h
0
Agent with harness
Raw trajectories
Retrospective Harness Optimization
① Coreset Selection
Trajectory Distribution
t-SNE 1
t-SNE 2
easy hard 
D
core
② Group Rollout
parallel
task
rollout
self-validation
self-consistency
Harness
Update
Instruction
③ Harness Proposal
Original Harness
k trajs.
compare
h
0
h
1
h
2
h
3
−0.5
+1.4
+0.7
Deployment
User Online
improved
harness
Figure 2: The RHO pipeline. Coreset Selection picks a small, difficulty-diverse subset of past tasks with a de-
terminantal point process (DPP). Group Rollout re-solves each task G times and diagnoses within-trajectory failures
(self-validation) and cross-trajectory disagreements (self-consistency). Harness Proposal samples N candidate
harnesses and keeps the one whose rollouts are most preferred over the baseline. No ground-truth labels are used.
3 Problem Setting
We define a harness h as a persistent collection of
tools, prompts, and skills that an agent can use to
solve a task. Given a task t and a harness h, an
agent can attempt the task using a loop of reason-
ing, acting, and observing. This multi-step process
generates a trajectory τ , which records the infor-
mation read by the agent, its chain of thought, the
tools used, and the final output. We denote this
execution process with a prompted agent opera-
tion as τ = solve(h, t). As the agent executes
multiple tasks, it produces a dataset of trajectories
D = {τ
1
, τ
2
, . . . , τ
n
}. These trajectories often con-
tain instances of failure and useful insights that
can be used to improve the harness. Consequently,
we ask whether the agent can retrospectively an-
alyze past trajectories to optimize its harness and
improve its future performance. To quantify this,
we define a latent utility function U (t, τ ) that mea-
sures the quality of a trajectory. We formalize the
optimization as a function optimize(h, instruction)
that returns a modified harness h
′
. The goal is to
find an optimal harness h
⋆ 
that maximizes the ex-
pected utility on future tasks:
h
⋆ 
= arg max
h
′ 
E
t, τ ∼solve(h
′
,t) 
[U (t, τ )] .
Problem. However, estimating this utility function
accurately is difficult in practice. To evaluate the
true utility of a harness, we would need a represen-
tative validation set of future tasks and a mecha-
nism to calculate the success rate of the agent using
this specific harness. In our setting, the function U
is latent and cannot be directly observed.
Our Approach. Because the utility U is latent, we
cannot directly optimize it. Instead, we substitute
this latent utility with a self-preference estimator.
Algorithm 1 A single round of RHO. One
backbone instantiates every operator (the difficulty
judge, solve, optimize, and rank), differing in its
inputs and consulting no ground-truth label.
Input: past trajectories D={(t
i
, τ
i
)}
i 
and harness h
0
, with
coreset size k, group size G, candidate count N , and DPP
weight θ
Output: updated harness h
⋆
STAGE 1 CORESET SELECTION
1: r
i 
← judge(t
i
, τ
i
) ∀ (t
i
, τ
i
) ∈ D
2: D
core 
← DPP-GREEDY

{(t
i
, r
i
)}; θ, k

STAGE 2 GROUP ROLLOUT
3: for t ∈ D
core 
in parallel do
4: {τ
t,g 
}
G
g=1 
← solve(h
0
, t) ▷ k×G rollouts
5: τ 
(0)
t 
← τ
t,1 
▷ fixed baseline rollout
6: I
t 
← rank
val

t, {τ
t,g 
}
 
∪ rank
con

t, {τ
t,g 
}

7: end for
8: I ← 
S
t∈D
core 
I
t
STAGE 3 BEST-OF-N HARNESS PROPOSAL
9: for j = 1, . . . , N in parallel do
10: h
j 
← optimize

h
0
, I

11: τ 
(j)
t 
← solve(h
j 
, t) ∀ t ∈ D
core 
▷ N ×k re-solves
12: S
j 
← 
1
k
P
t∈D
core 
rank

t, τ 
(j)
t 
, τ 
(0)
t

13: end for
14: j
⋆ 
← arg max
j 
S
j
15: return h
j
⋆ 
if S
j
⋆ 
> 0, else h
0
Specifically, we instruct the agent to compare mul-
tiple trajectories on the same task to compute a
self-preference ranking. We define a ranking func-
tion as (rank, rationale) = rank(t, τ
1
, τ
2
, . . . , τ
m
).
This function yields a preference ordering over the
given trajectories and provides a rationale that ex-
plains why the agent prefers certain executions over
others. The next section details how we organize
the operations of solving, ranking, and optimizing
to improve the latent harness utility.
4 Retrospective Harness Optimization
We propose RHO, a self-supervised method that
improves a harness using only past trajectories.

Specifically, our pipeline (Figure 2) consists of
three stages, namely coreset selection, group
rollout, and best-of-N harness proposal. First, we
select a representative subset of past tasks to define
the optimization target. Next, we sample a group
of parallel rollouts for each task in this coreset and
extract harness improvement signals from them.
Finally, we generate N candidate harnesses based
on these signals and retain the most preferred one
using pairwise self-preference. The full algorithm
is detailed in Algorithm 1.
4.1 Coreset Selection
Given a large set of past trajectories, we need to
extract the most critical signals to guide the harness
optimization. Optimizing the harness on every in-
dividual trajectory is computationally prohibitive,
and it further risks diluting important signals with
trivial ones. To address this, we first select a coreset
D
core 
from the full set D to represent the trajecto-
ries that require optimization the most, echoing
trajectory-based data valuation that scores train-
ing samples by their influence on optimization (Xu
et al., 2025). Specifically, we require the coreset
to capture both challenging and diverse scenarios.
This requirement encourages our optimization to
cover a wide range of failure modes when address-
ing the most difficult problems. To accomplish
this, we introduce a Determinantal Point Process
(DPP) kernel (Kulesza and Taskar, 2012) to rank
all past trajectories by difficulty while satisfying
a diversity constraint. In practice, we employ a
language model judge to analyze every trajectory
τ
i 
and extract a difficulty score r
i 
alongside a tex-
tual description. This description details the spe-
cific challenges of the problem and potential failure
modes. We then compute the embedding of this
description and use the cosine similarity between
embeddings as the similarity metric S
i,j 
for any
two trajectories τ
i 
and τ
j 
. By considering both
the difficulty scores r and the trajectory similar-
ity matrix S, we construct an L-ensemble kernel
matrix
L = diag(er) S diag(er),
where er
i 
is a scaled version of the trajectory’s diffi-
culty score r
i
:
er
i 
= 
 
max(r
i
, ϵ) / max
j 
max(r
j 
, ϵ)

α
,
α = θ/

2(1 − θ)

.
With this kernel function L, DPP selects a subset
Y with probability proportional to the kernel deter-
minant det(L
Y 
), using parameter θ to adjust the
relative importance of difficulty and diversity via
α. With θ = 1, the trajectories are ranked purely
by difficulty and θ = 0 (uniform weights) ranked
purely by similarity diversity. Using θ = 0.7, we
select k trajectories into a coreset D
core 
that covers
difficult, diverse failure modes for later stages.
4.2 Group Rollout
Inspired by previous work that computes advan-
tages relative to a group of sampled rollouts, using
the group as a baseline in place of a learned value
model (Shao et al., 2024), we generate a set of tra-
jectories by running G parallel agent solves on each
coreset task. Subsequently, the agent compares
these group trajectories to identify underperform-
ing runs. The agent then uses contrastive signals
within the group to formulate instructions for opti-
mizing the harness. Specifically, we perform this
self-preference analysis along two dimensions.
• Self-validation (rank
val
). This dimension ex-
amines the correctness of the agent within each
trajectory. The agent inspects each trajectory
against the required task and environment ob-
servations to determine whether the objective is
efficiently achieved, exploiting the partial ability
of models to recognize the limits of their own
knowledge (Pan et al., 2025). During this process,
it flags incorrect tool invocations, false assump-
tions, and premature stopping. These flagged
aspects are then extracted as areas of improve-
ment for the relatively underperforming runs.
• Self-consistency (rank
con
). This dimension
examines whether the behavior of the agent
remains consistent across different trajectories.
Because low self-consistency typically indicates
high uncertainty (Wang et al., 2022; Farquhar
et al., 2024), we instruct the agent to analyze
contradictions among trajectories. The agent
identifies consequential disagreements, such
as divergent plans, tool sequences, or final
answers, and generates optimization instructions
to encourage more consistent behavior.
These rank
val 
and rank
con 
analyses yield struc-
tured evaluations in JSON format, and for each
task their union forms the improvement instruction
I
t 
= rank
val

t, {τ
t,g
}
 
∪ rank
con

t, {τ
t,g
}

. As a
result, we merge {I
t
} across all tasks in the coreset
to form the final harness improvement instructions.

Table 1: Held-out pass rate after harness optimization. The Architecture column indicates which harness surface
each method edits. ∆ is the absolute change over Vanilla Codex on the same held-out split.
Harness SWE-Bench Pro Terminal-Bench 2 GAIA-2
Method Architecture Pass ∆ Pass ∆ Pass ∆
Vanilla Codex None 0.59 n/a 0.71 n/a 0.29 n/a
Dynamic Cheatsheet (Suzgun et al., 2025) Skills 0.62 +0.03 0.73 +0.02 0.30 +0.01
ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2025) Memory 0.61 +0.02 0.73 +0.02 0.28 −0.01
Sleep-time Compute (Lin et al., 2025) Memory 0.64 +0.05 0.73 +0.02 0.32 +0.03
RHO Skills+Tools 0.78 +0.19 0.76 +0.05 0.37 +0.08
4.3 Best-of-N Harness Proposal
After obtaining the improvement instructions, we
optimize the harness by providing these instruc-
tions to the agent. However, as observed in prior
studies on agent evolution (Agrawal et al., 2025;
Hu et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2026), harness optimiza-
tion is inherently stochastic and may not reliably
improve performance even with valid input sig-
nals. To mitigate this limitation, we sample harness
proposals in parallel and filter them using agent
self-preference. This selection is designed to fa-
vor candidates whose improvements generalize to
future tasks. Specifically, we execute N parallel op-
timization calls to generate N candidate harnesses,
denoted as h
1 
to h
N 
. Following this step, we use
these candidates to obtain N sets of new trajec-
tories on the k coreset tasks. For every coreset
task, we then compute an agent preference score
by ranking the new trajectory from each candidate
harness against the old trajectory from the origi-
nal harness. We aggregate these scores across the
coreset to determine the relative advantage score
of each candidate:
S
j 
= 
1
|D
core
|
X
t∈D
core
rank

t, τ 
(j)
t 
, τ 
(0)
t

,
where τ 
(0)
t 
is the original harness trajectory for task
t. Finally, we return the candidate harness with the
maximum relative advantage to replace the original
one. We accept this update only if its score is
strictly greater than zero (S
j 
> 0).
5 Experiments and Results
Setup. We use the Codex agent (OpenAI, 2025)
as the base harness for retrospective optimization.
Specifically, this agent uses GPT-5.5 (OpenAI,
2026) configured with high reasoning effort. When
we invoke Codex to solve a task, we construct the
harness as a configurable workspace folder. This
folder contains executable scripts as tools, along
with text files for skills and instructions. For all
our experiments, we set the coreset size k to 10.
In addition, we use 3 for both parallel trajectory
sampling and harness proposals. To measure the
improvement, we report the pass rate on the held-
out test set using both the vanilla Codex harness
and the optimized one.
Data. We collect past trajectories from existing
benchmark datasets. Specifically, we divide the
original benchmarks into a trajectory set and a
test set. We then run the vanilla Codex agent
on the trajectory set to generate the required tra-
jectories for RHO. Building on this, we evaluate
RHO on SWE-Bench Pro, Terminal-Bench 2, and
GAIA-2. SWE-Bench Pro contains long-horizon
software-engineering tasks requiring repository-
level reasoning and multi-file edits (Deng et al.,
2025). Terminal-Bench 2 contains command-
line tasks with executable graders (Merrill et al.,
2026). GAIA-2 evaluates LLM agents in dynamic,
asynchronous environments for knowledge work
(Froger et al., 2026). As a result, these three bench-
marks cover a wide range of task types across soft-
ware engineering, technical work, and knowledge
work. During optimization RHO consumes only
past trajectories and its own judgments; graders are
used solely for held-out evaluation. We provide de-
tailed information about the benchmarks and data
splits in Appendix E.
5.1 Comparison with Feedback-Free
Baselines
We compare RHO against three competitive har-
ness optimization methods that do not require vali-
dation feedback. For the baselines, Dynamic Cheat-
sheet maintains a running record of useful facts and
procedures (Suzgun et al., 2025). ReasoningBank
stores reusable reasoning patterns and retrieves the
top-k relevant entries at inference time (Ouyang

Instructions
Skills
Tools
Terminal-Bench 2 
119 prompt lines
10 helper functions
Black-box
Recover behavior from
queries alone
Final gate
Re-run the grader and
compare outputs
Package fix
Check the rebuilt
package loads cleanly
Polygons
Check exported masks
are well-formed
smoke_test_imports package
validate_polygon_masks mask_csv
SWE-bench Pro 
104 prompt lines
2 helper functions
Reference
Reuse a proven fix from
history
Trace path
Trace the real code path
before editing
Spec ledger
Match the prompt's
exact requirements
Smoke test
Exercise new code at
runtime
check_build_and_lint repo
run_targeted_tests repo, test_cmd
GAIA-2 
101 prompt lines
11 helper functions
Timing
Anchor deadlines to the
simulated clock
User reply
Send the real reply via
the interface
Decompose
Track every mandatory
action
By content
Confirm the target
before acting
list_app_functions app
get_function_schema app, function
call_function app, function, args
Figure 3: Highest-scoring harness produced by RHO on each benchmark. Instructions are task-agnostic procedural
rules, Skills record grader or environment idiosyncrasies that previously caused failures, and Tools are executable
scripts. Items shown are representative, and the full verbatim contents of each harness are in Appendix H.
et al., 2025). Similarly, Sleep-time Compute pre-
processes past traces offline into compact notes,
which are then prepended to the agent’s context
(Lin et al., 2025). We adapt each baseline to our
datasets and agent setting while holding the total
agent-call budget approximately fixed to ensure a
fair comparison. Detailed adaptation procedures
are provided in Appendix F.
As Table 1 shows, RHO delivers consistent im-
provements across all three benchmarks, whereas
the baselines do not. Most notably, we achieve an
absolute improvement of 19% on SWE-Bench Pro
without relying on any validation-based grading.
We attribute this advantage to the more flexible
harness optimization that RHO enables. Specif-
ically, the agent can create new tools, skills, and
instructions for the harness, whereas previous meth-
ods focus predominantly on memory systems or
text-based skills. Furthermore, the use of self-
preference may contribute to the consistency of
these harness improvements. In contrast, the per-
formance gains of the baseline methods tend to be
smaller and vary across different datasets. In the
next section (Section 5.2), we examine how RHO
modifies the harness to improve the agent.
5.2 What the Optimized Harness Contains
Figure 3 summarizes and interprets the new har-
ness contents generated after RHO optimization.
In our work, the harness is materialized as a direc-
tory containing markdown files for instructions and
skills, as well as executable scripts for tools.
Across all three benchmarks, RHO adds multi-
ple new skills and tools to the harness. Many of
these new additions address typical failure modes
encountered by the original harness. For example,
in SWE-Bench Pro, the agent learns that the Go
toolchain resides at a non-standard location outside
the default path. It also discovers that Python cache
directories must be stripped before producing the
final diff, as failing to do so often prevents patches
from applying cleanly. To address these, the agent
adds a new check_build_and_lint tool that
locates non-standard toolchains and flags the gen-
erated artifacts that must be kept out of the patch,
fixing the diff-hygiene procedures the original tra-
jectories repeatedly missed. These examples illus-
trate how RHO identifies useful tools and skills
across diverse scenarios by analyzing past failures.
5.3 Comparison with Validation-Feedback
Optimization
We next compare RHO against Meta-Harness (Lee
et al., 2026). Meta-Harness is a validation-feedback
optimizer: a proposer emits harness edits, each can-
didate is graded on a labeled search set with the
ground-truth grader, and the search keeps the har-
nesses that score best on that set. To maintain a fair
comparison, we use the same Codex agent as the
Meta-Harness proposer and solver. Unlike RHO,
Meta-Harness requires held-out labels, and because
it evolves over multiple rounds, it consumes more
agent calls. Therefore, we evaluate it at a single
round to match our compute budget, as well as in
an extended-budget setting of ten rounds.
At the matched single-round budget, Meta-
Harness selects its best candidate using validation
scores but achieves only a 0.62 pass rate on SWE-
Bench Pro. This is substantially lower than the 0.78
pass rate achieved by RHO. Scaling Meta-Harness
to a 10-round setting increases its performance ceil-
ing to 0.80 on SWE-Bench Pro. However, this
higher performance requires roughly three times
the optimization-phase compute of RHO (320 vs.

Table 2: RHO versus Meta-Harness, a validation-
feedback optimizer, on SWE-Bench Pro. Agent calls is
the optimization-time budget relative to one RHO run.
Held-out pass rate on the same split as Table 1.
Method
Val.
labels
Agent
calls
SWE-Bench
Pro
RHO none 103 (1.0×) 0.78
Meta-Harness (1 round) required 41 (0.4×) 0.62
Meta-Harness (10 rounds) required 320 (3.1×) 0.80
103 agent calls) and, more importantly, still de-
pends on held-out labels that RHO does not use.
6 Discussion
6.1 How does agent behavior change after
optimization?
Although RHO creates new skills and tools for
the agent, it is not immediately apparent through
which mechanisms these updates enable the agent
to perform better on future tasks. To examine this,
we visualize the frequency of tool calls and the
cumulative success rate with respect to the number
of steps taken by the agent. Specifically, Figure 4
plots the cumulative fraction of held-out tasks re-
solved within a given number of agent steps, and
it shows how the action mix of the agent changes
over time. We observe that the performance im-
provements across all three datasets primarily orig-
inate from higher success rates on tasks requiring
long horizons. In contrast, the gains concentrate
on long-horizon tasks rather than those completed
in fewer steps, most clearly on SWE-Bench Pro.
Furthermore, the optimization process changes the
working patterns of the agent. Consequently, the
optimized agent shifts toward relying more heavily
on specific types of actions. For example, on SWE-
Bench Pro, the agent verifies its work much more
frequently. This proactive verification appears to
account for a large portion of the performance gains
on long-horizon tasks. On Terminal-Bench 2 and
GAIA-2, the agent increases its accuracy by ac-
tively applying newly developed tools. The newly
added tools are invoked on nearly every held-out
task, and on GAIA-2 the new environment helper
runs about twenty times per task. Terminal-Bench 2
is an instructive exception—there the generated
scripts are never executed, and the gain instead
comes from the procedural playbook written into
the instructions, showing that RHO adapts the har-
ness surface to each environment rather than always
adding executable tools. Complementary to our
Table 3: Best-of-N harness proposal vs. a single sam-
pled candidate. Held-out pass rate of the N =3 candi-
dates. Mean is the expected score under uniform random
selection, and Chosen is the candidate RHO deploys.
Dataset Mean Chosen Std Lowest
SWE-Bench Pro 0.79 0.78 0.06 0.73
Terminal-Bench 2 0.74 0.76 0.03 0.71
GAIA-2 0.34 0.37 0.03 0.32
Table 4: Ablation of the diagnosis step across all three
benchmarks. Each row re-renders full RHO’s diagnoses
with one cue blanked, holding the proposal agent’s
prompt fixed (§6.4). Raw trajectory skips diagnosis and
shows the proposal agent the raw trajectories directly.
Cells report held-out pass rate.
Variant SWE Pro TB 2 GAIA-2
Full diagnosis 0.78 0.76 0.37
− self-consistency 0.56 0.75 0.27
− self-validation 0.70 0.73 0.30
Raw trajectory 0.60 0.75 0.29
action-level statistics, token-level attribution over
long reasoning chains offers a finer-grained lens on
long-horizon agent behavior (Pan et al., 2026b).
6.2 How does coreset selection shape
capability evolution?
We investigate how coreset selection influences
the optimization process. To this end, we compare
our DPP-based selection against several ablation
strategies. These variants include selecting tasks
solely by difficulty (θ = 1), selecting tasks purely
to maximize coverage (θ = 0), and sampling
trajectories randomly. In addition, we measure the
final performance of the optimized harness under
each selection strategy. As the t-SNE projection
of task embeddings in Figure 5 reveals, selecting
tasks exclusively by difficulty causes the chosen
samples to cluster in a narrow region of the task
distribution. This clustering occurs because the
language model judges certain types of tasks as
inherently more difficult, and consequently it
fails to include other task types in the coreset.
As a result, this strategy yields no meaningful
performance improvement after optimization.
Similarly, optimizing solely for coverage also
produces suboptimal results. In contrast, random
sampling can occasionally select a trajectory that
proves useful for optimization. These findings
suggest that a coreset selection strategy balancing
both difficulty and diversity is vital for providing
the proper signals to guide harness optimization.

0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Fraction of tasks solved by step k
Vanilla pass@1 = 0.59
RHO pass@1 = 0.78
SWE-Bench Pro
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60 
Vanilla
Mean actions per task
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60 
RHO 
Verify +61%
Navigate −13%
Mean actions per task
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Step k
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Vanilla pass@1 = 0.71
RHO pass@1 = 0.76
Terminal-Bench 2
0.00
0.20
0.40 
Vanilla
0.00
0.20
0.40 
RHO 
Navigate +27%
Edit −44%
0 15 30 45 60 75
Step k
0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
Vanilla pass@1 = 0.29
RHO pass@1 = 0.37
GAIA-2
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60 
Vanilla
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60 
RHO 
Execute +25%
Edit −17%
0 20 40 60 80 100
Step k
Navigate Search Read Edit Execute Verify
Figure 4: Behavior shift after RHO. RHO sustains longer working sessions and shifts the agent’s per-step action
mix toward verification on SWE-Bench Pro, and toward execution on Terminal-Bench 2 and GAIA-2.
Coverage Difficulty RHO
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Vanilla Codex: 0.59
Random 0.64
Coverage 0.58
Difficulty 0.62
RHO 0.78
(a) Coreset picks on task embedding (b) Held-out pass rate
Figure 5: Coreset selection on SWE-Bench Pro. (a)
Where each selector’s picks land on the task embedding,
with coverage spreading out, difficulty clustering, and
RHO’s DPP balancing both. (b) Held-out pass rate of
the harness optimized from each coreset. Difficulty or
diversity alone trails even random sampling, and only
the DPP’s combination reaches the top gain.
6.3 Does RHO produce consistent harness
updates?
Because RHO operates without ground-truth la-
bels for reference, we evaluate whether its opti-
mization outputs are consistent across runs. This
consistency is closely tied to the overall effective-
ness of our best-of-N harness proposal. We ex-
amine whether the selection strategy reliably iden-
tifies the candidate harness that performs best on
downstream tasks. In this experiment, we mea-
sure the test scores of all three generated candi-
date harnesses rather than just the most preferred
one. Here Table 3 shows that the generated har-
nesses exhibit only moderate variance. Notably,
even the lowest-scoring candidate still meaning-
fully improves agent performance over the base-
line. Furthermore, the best-of-N selection prevents
the deployment of poorly performing harnesses.
Specifically, the chosen harness scores higher than
the worst candidate across all three benchmarks.
At the same time, the most preferred harness does
not invariably coincide with the highest-scoring
candidate on the test set, though the selection con-
sistently avoids the worst candidate. Comparing
each candidate’s preference score S
j 
with its held-
out pass rate further shows that self-preference is a
conservative selector rather than a perfect ranker:
on SWE-Bench Pro a less-preferred candidate in
fact reached 0.85, above the chosen one’s 0.78.
What the mechanism reliably guarantees is safety
rather than perfect ranking. Because an update
is deployed only when the agent prefers it over
the current harness (S
j 
> 0), the deployed har-
ness never fell below the vanilla baseline on any
benchmark; every candidate beats vanilla on SWE-
Bench Pro and GAIA-2, and on Terminal-Bench 2
the worst candidate matches vanilla (0.71) while
the chosen one reaches 0.76.
6.4 How much does retrospective analysis
contribute?
We analyze the contribution of the two signals ex-
tracted during retrospective analysis, namely self-

validation and self-consistency. We compare these
explicit signals against a more direct approach that
provides raw trajectories during optimization and
skips the explicit retrospective analysis step. In
addition, we study the individual contribution of
each diagnostic signal to the final performance.
To investigate the necessity of the group roll-
out and diagnostic stages, we conduct an ablation
study. Specifically, we remove the self-validation
and self-consistency signals independently, and we
subsequently rerun the optimization and evalua-
tion procedures. We also introduce a raw trajec-
tory baseline. This baseline bypasses the separate
ranking analysis. Instead, it provides the original
trajectories directly to the optimization step, ask-
ing the agent to analyze the trajectory and propose
improvements in a single pass. Table 4 shows that
removing either the self-consistency or the self-
validation signal consistently degrades final perfor-
mance across benchmarks. This result indicates
that both signals are highly important for optimiz-
ing the harness. Additionally, full diagnosis out-
performs the simplified raw-trajectory baseline on
all three benchmarks. The raw-trajectory baseline
grants the proposal agent the same editable sur-
face as RHO—tools, skills, and instructions—so
the gap to full diagnosis (0.60 vs. 0.78 on SWE-
Bench Pro) reflects the value of the structured ret-
rospective analysis rather than a broader editing
surface. This result suggests that although single-
pass trajectory analysis is feasible, the explicit self-
validation and self-consistency signals are essential
rather than incidental, yielding more reliable im-
provements across datasets. Finally, Table 4 is a
controlled ablation that removes one diagnosis cue
while holding the rest of the pipeline on a fixed
path (n=1), so it measures the marginal contri-
bution of each cue; it should not be read as the
end-to-end effect of disabling a signal. To measure
run-to-run robustness, we additionally reran the
full pipeline end to end twice per ablated strategy,
with independently generated candidate sets: ev-
ery rerun configuration stayed within ±0.01–0.03
of its mean (0.79 ± 0.01 without self-consistency
and 0.815 ± 0.025 without self-validation on SWE-
Bench Pro, n=2), and in no rerun did performance
drop to the controlled-ablation level. With n=2 this
is indicative rather than conclusive, but it shows
that the best-of-N proposal and the remaining sig-
nal compensate when a cue is missing, so removing
one component does not destabilize the pipeline.
7 Conclusion
We introduced RHO, which reframes harness im-
provement as a retrospective process that an agent
can run on its own past experience, rather than a
search guided by external ground-truth feedback.
The central idea is that an agent’s own trajectories
already contain the signal needed to improve it,
since re-solving past tasks and comparing the out-
comes exposes where the harness fails and what
would fix it. Across all three domains (software
engineering, technical work, and knowledge work),
this self-supervised loop yields consistent held-out
gains and reshapes how the agent works. These
results are established on a Codex-style CLI agent
over a single retrospective round; extending RHO
to other backbones and agent frameworks, and to
iterative multi-pass optimization, is natural future
work. We see RHO as a step toward agents that
keep improving from the experience they accumu-
late in deployment, where labeled data is rare.
Limitations
In this paper we introduce RHO, a self-supervised
method that improves an agent’s harness from its
own past trajectories without any external grading.
However, operating without ground-truth feedback
carries several limitations. First, group rollout re-
plays each coreset task several times, which as-
sumes environments that reset cleanly and tolerate
repeated attempts, leaving one-shot or irreversible
tasks outside the setting RHO targets. Second,
RHO presumes that a meaningful portion of the
agent’s competence is mediated by an editable har-
ness of prompts, skills, and tools; our experiments
span software engineering, technical work, and
knowledge work, and extending RHO to domains
with different harness surfaces, task fingerprints,
and rollout budgets remains future work. Third, all
experiments use a single backbone and agent frame-
work (a Codex-style CLI agent running GPT-5.5).
The method’s signals come only from the agent’s
own trajectories and pairwise judgments, so it does
not inherently depend on this particular backbone,
but verifying that it transfers to other backbones
and agent frameworks requires further experiments
that we leave to future work. Fourth, we evalu-
ate a single retrospective optimization round and
make no claim that gains compound or even re-
main monotonic across multiple rounds; studying
iterative, multi-pass RHO over sequential trajec-
tory batches is future work. Fifth, the optimized

harnesses are adapted to their own benchmark en-
vironment (for example, a repair-verification tool
for SWE-Bench Pro versus a procedural playbook
for Terminal-Bench 2) rather than forming one uni-
versal harness; we leave a formal cross-benchmark
transfer study to future work. Sixth, RHO trusts
past trajectories as its only optimization input; in
open environments trajectories can embed adversar-
ial content injected mid-task (Liu et al., 2026), and
harness updates distilled from compromised trajec-
tories could entrench such behavior, reinforcing the
audit practices in the Ethics Statement.
Ethics Statement
RHO modifies persistent agent behavior from
model-generated judgments. This can amplify mis-
taken preferences, unsafe procedures, or biased
behavioral rules if the evaluator prefers them. De-
ployments should keep full audit logs, require hu-
man approval for sensitive harness edits, and use
domain-specific safety checks before applying ac-
cepted harnesses to high-impact tasks.
Reproducibility Statement
Every run persists prompts, completions, trajecto-
ries, diagnoses, candidate harnesses, harness diffs,
configs, scores, run metadata, and held-out re-
ports. The numbers in this draft are direct reads
from recorded run reports. A detailed compar-
ison with related work is given in Appendix A,
prompts are listed in Appendix B, hyperparameters
in Appendix C, full pipeline details in Appendix D,
per-dataset specifications in Appendix E, baseline
implementations in Appendix F, and per-method
optimization-phase compute cost in Appendix G.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Hong Kong RGC
Grant RFS2425-1S01, and was done during the first
author’s internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
References
Lakshya A. Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu,
Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav
Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J. Ryan, Meng
Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alexandros G.
Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and
Omar Khattab. 2025. GEPA: Reflective prompt evo-
lution can outperform reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.19457.
Xiang Deng, Jeff Da, Edwin Pan, Yannis Yiming He,
Charles Ide, Kanak Garg, Niklas Lauffer, Andrew
Park, Nitin Pasari, Chetan Rane, Karmini Sam-
path, Maya Krishnan, Srivatsa Kundurthy, Sean
Hendryx, Zifan Wang, Vijay Bharadwaj, Jeff Holm,
Raja Aluri, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, and 3 others.
2025. SWE-Bench Pro: Can AI agents solve long-
horizon software engineering tasks? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.16941.
Sebastian Farquhar, Jannik Kossen, Lorenz Kuhn, and
Yarin Gal. 2024. Detecting hallucinations in large
language models using semantic entropy. Nature,
630:625–630.
Romain Froger and 1 others. 2026. Gaia2: Benchmark-
ing LLM agents on dynamic and asynchronous envi-
ronments. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR). ArXiv:2602.11964.
Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. 2024. Au-
tomated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.08435.
Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari,
Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vard-
hamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T.
Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Zaharia,
and Christopher Potts. 2023. DSPy: Compiling
declarative language model calls into self-improving
pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03714.
Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. 2012. Determinantal
point processes for machine learning. Foundations
and Trends in Machine Learning, 5(2–3):123–286.
Yoonho Lee, Roshen Nair, Qizheng Zhang, Kangwook
Lee, Omar Khattab, and Chelsea Finn. 2026. Meta-
Harness: End-to-end optimization of model har-
nesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.28052.
Kevin Lin, Charlie Snell, Yu Wang, Charles Packer,
Sarah Wooders, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez.
2025. Sleep-time compute: Beyond inference scaling
at test-time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13171.
Minhua Lin, Zhiwei Zhang, Hanqing Lu, Hui Liu,
Xianfeng Tang, Qi He, Xiang Zhang, and Suhang
Wang. 2026. MemMA: Coordinating the memory
cycle through multi-agent reasoning and in-situ self-
evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18718.
Zhichao Liu, Wenbo Pan, Haining Yu, Ge Gao, Tianqing
Zhu, and Xiaohua Jia. 2026. WebTrap: Stealthy mid-
task hijacking of browser agents during navigation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.08310.
Mike A. Merrill, Alexander G. Shaw, Nicholas Carlini,
and 1 others. 2026. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking
agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line in-
terfaces. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR). ArXiv:2601.11868.
OpenAI. 2025. OpenAI Codex. https://
developers.openai.com/learn/codex.
Accessed 2026-08-29.

OpenAI. 2026. Introducing GPT-5.5.
https://openai.com/index/
introducing-gpt-5-5/.
Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, Yanfei Chen, Rujun Han,
Zifeng Wang, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Rui Meng,
Chun-Liang Li, Yizhu Jiao, Kaiwen Zha, Maohao
Shen, Vishy Tirumalashetty, George Lee, Jiawei
Han, Tomas Pfister, and Chen-Yu Lee. 2026. Skil-
lOS: Learning skill curation for self-evolving agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.06614.
Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, I-Hung Hsu, Yanfei Chen,
Ke Jiang, Zifeng Wang, Rujun Han, Long T. Le,
Samira Daruki, Xiangru Tang, Vishy Tirumalashetty,
George Lee, Mahsan Rofouei, Hangfei Lin, Jiawei
Han, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. 2025. Reason-
ingBank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning
memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25140.
Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang,
Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez.
2023. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating sys-
tems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560.
Wenbo Pan, Shujie Liu, Xiangyang Zhou, Shiwei Zhang,
Wanlu Shi, Mirror Xu, and Xiaohua Jia. 2026a. M
⋆
:
Every task deserves its own memory harness. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2604.11811.
Wenbo Pan, Zhichao Liu, Xianlong Wang, Haining
Yu, and Xiaohua Jia. 2026b. Towards long-horizon
interpretability: Efficient and faithful multi-token
attribution for reasoning LLMs. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2602.01914.
Wenbo Pan, Jie Xu, Qiguang Chen, Junhao Dong,
Libo Qin, Xinfeng Li, Haining Yu, and Xiaohua Jia.
2025. Can LLMs refuse questions they do not know?
Measuring knowledge-aware refusal in factual tasks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01782.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu,
Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan
Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024.
DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03300.
Mirac Suzgun, Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi,
Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. 2025. Dynamic cheat-
sheet: Test-time learning with adaptive memory.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07952.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le,
Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and
Denny Zhou. 2022. Self-consistency improves chain
of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.11171.
Zihan Wu, Jie Xu, Yun Peng, Chun Yong Chong, and
Xiaohua Jia. 2026. MulVul: Retrieval-augmented
multi-agent code vulnerability detection via cross-
model prompt evolution. In Proceedings of the An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL).
Shitao Xiao, Zheng Liu, Peitian Zhang, Niklas Muen-
nighoff, Defu Lian, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2023. C-Pack:
Packed resources for general chinese embeddings.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07597.
Jie Xu, Zihan Wu, Cong Wang, and Xiaohua Jia. 2025.
LiveVal: Real-time and trajectory-based data valua-
tion via adaptive reference points. In Proceedings of
the ACM International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management (CIKM).
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu,
Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. 2023.
Large language models as optimizers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.03409.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen,
Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James
Zou. 2024. TextGrad: Automatic “differentiation”
via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han,
Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and Jimmy
Ba. 2022. Large language models are human-level
prompt engineers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01910.

Table 5: Comparison of RHO with prior methods. The right block marks whether each method meets RHO’s
setting along three axes. Label-free: uses no ground-truth metric or validation set. Full harness: edits executable
tools and skills, not memory or prompt text alone. Single pass: a one-shot retrospective pass, rather than an online
stream, an iterative validation-scored search, or a weight-training loop. satisfied, G# partial, # not satisfied.
Satisfies RHO’s setting
Method Harness architecture Feedback signal Cost 
Label-
free
Full
harness
Single
pass
Validation-feedback optimization
OPRO (Yang et al., 2023) Prompt Validation metric Iterative search # # #
DSPy (Khattab et al., 2023) Prompt + demos Validation metric Iterative search # # #
TextGrad (Yuksekgonul et al., 2024) Prompt Textual gradient Iterative search # # #
GEPA (Agrawal et al., 2025) Prompt Val. metric + reflection Iterative (genetic) # # #
ADAS (Hu et al., 2024) Full agent code Validation accuracy 25–30 iter. # #
Meta-Harness (Lee et al., 2026) Full harness code Search-set score ∼20 iter. # #
Experience-based self-improvement
Dynamic Cheatsheet (Suzgun et al., 2025) Cheatsheet text Self-judgment Online stream G# #
ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2025) Memory items LLM-as-judge Online stream # #
MemMA (Lin et al., 2026) Memory entries Synthetic probe QA Online (session) # #
Sleep-time Compute (Lin et al., 2025) Input context None Precompute #
SkillOS
† 
(Ouyang et al., 2026) Skill list RL reward
† 
RL training G# G# #
RHO (ours) Tools + skills + instr. Self-preference Single pass
†
SkillOS’s reinforcement-learning reward is an LLM-as-judge self-signal rather than gold labels, but it still requires a large
training corpus of task streams, a separate judge model, and weight updates.
A Comparison with Related Work
Table 5 compares RHO with the prior methods discussed in Section 2. For each method we report the
harness surface it edits, the feedback signal that drives it, and the cost regime it incurs, and we mark
whether it meets RHO’s setting on three criteria, namely whether optimization is label-free, whether it edits
the full harness, and whether it runs as a single offline retrospective pass. Validation-feedback optimizers
reach the full-harness end of the surface axis, where ADAS and Meta-Harness rewrite executable code,
but every member of this family steers the search with a ground-truth metric and iterates against it.
Experience-based methods drop the labels, yet they only curate memory or skill text online and leave
the executable harness untouched, while Sleep-time Compute precomputes context offline but optimizes
nothing. As a result, each prior method satisfies at most two of the three axes, and RHO is the only entry
that satisfies all three at once.
B Prompts
This appendix collects the prompts that instantiate the five agent operators of RHO (§3, Algorithm 1,
Figure 2), namely solve, the difficulty judge used in Coreset Selection, the diagnosis analysis, optimize,
and rank. The prompts are reproduced verbatim. Placeholders of the form {name} are filled at call time
with the values described under each block.
B.1 Solve
Every solve(h, t) call materializes the harness and the task into a fresh workspace at harness/ and
task/ and hands the agent the wrapper instructions below. The wrapper is task-agnostic, in that the
harness directory carries all task-shaping guidance, and the agent is told only how to read the workspace
and how to deliver a final answer. The same wrapper is reused for the baseline rollout and for every
candidate-harness rollout so that solve is the only varying input.
Listing 1 The solve wrapper prompt.
Solve the task defined in task/prompt.md, using the information and tools
,→ available under harness/.
The harness (harness/) is a toolkit of resources and guidance that helps the
,→ agent solve tasks. It can contain any type of file - helper scripts,
,→ artifacts, environment setup, documentation with relevant context, and

,→ workflows to follow.
Workspace layout:
harness/ - read and invoke anything here, but do not modify it
task/ - files for this task, including prompt.md
Steps:
1. Familiarize yourself with the information and available tools in harness/.
2. Read and analyze task/prompt.md.
3. Complete the task. For code repair tasks, modify files directly under
,→ task/repo/.
4. Present your final answer in your last message, in the format prompt.md
,→ specifies (or plain prose if unspecified).
B.2 Coreset Selection (Difficulty Judge)
The difficulty judge produces the score r
i 
∈ [0, 10] and the abstract fingerprint ϕ
i 
that drive the DPP
coreset selector of §4.1. It sees the task description together with a length-bounded digest of one short
prior trajectory under the current harness. The digest is truncated head/tail to a fixed token budget, and
any commands that read the task’s expected-answer files are scrubbed before the digest is shown to the
judge. The judge is asked to keep the fingerprint in task-agnostic structural vocabulary so that fingerprints
from different codebases remain comparable under cosine similarity.
Listing 2 The difficulty judge prompt used in Coreset Selection.
Rate the difficulty of the following software engineering task and write
an abstract structural fingerprint of it. You may also use the observed
agent run below to inform your judgment.
Output a JSON object (no markdown fences, no extra text):
{
"difficulty": <float in [0.0, 10.0]>,
"abstract_fingerprint": "<see guide below>"
}
Difficulty scale:
- 0-2: trivial (obvious one-line fix, cosmetic change).
- 3-5: moderate (localized change, well-defined spec).
- 6-8: hard (multi-file, non-obvious design, subtle bugs).
- 9-10: very hard (cross-cutting refactor, deep reasoning required).
Abstract fingerprint guide - 3-5 sentences (~60-120 words) describing
the 
*shape* 
of the problem in vocabulary that would apply equally to
any software project. Cover:
- Failure mode: what typically goes wrong (partial propagation,
missed boundary case, silent precedence regression, broken invariant
under a new branch, etc.).
- Source of difficulty: what makes it hard or easy (scattered
invariants, ambiguous spec, tight coupling, purely localized
arithmetic, etc.).
- Technical complexity: scope (single-function / multi-file /
cross-module / architectural), reasoning depth (local / contextual /
global invariant tracking), type of change (bug fix / feature /
refactor / rollback).
Do NOT mention: repository, product, company, framework, or library
names; file paths; function, class, config, or variable names;
domain-specific nouns tied to a particular codebase. Use only abstract
structural programming vocabulary (invariant, precedence, boundary,
state reconciliation, propagation, ordering, contract, etc.).
The observed agent run contains concrete file paths, library names, and
tool output. Abstract these out the same way - fingerprints describe
shapes, not the specific codebase the agent happened to run in.
The observed run is a single noisy sample, not ground truth. Do not

lower difficulty just because the agent appeared to succeed in one
attempt, and do not raise difficulty just because one attempt thrashed
on bootstrap issues. Treat the trajectory as evidence that adjusts your
prior on task difficulty and failure mode; weight it relative to what
the task description itself implies.
Example of a well-abstracted fingerprint:
"A multi-file refactor whose difficulty comes from keeping a single
shared invariant consistent across several independently-evolving
modules; the typical failure mode is partial propagation, where one
call site adopts the new contract while another silently keeps the
old, producing a latent bug that only surfaces under a specific
input ordering. Spec ambiguity is low but reasoning must be global -
the change is mechanically small per site but requires tracing a
contract through the call graph."
Task:
---
{query}
---
Observed agent run (under the current harness):
---
{trajectory_digest}
---
{query} is the natural-language task description. {trajectory_digest} is the scrubbed, head/tail-
truncated digest of one prior trajectory for the same task. This difficulty value is the score r
i 
∈ [0, 10] that
enters the DPP kernel, where it is normalized by r
i
/10 as in §4.1, and the fingerprint is embedded to a
unit vector x
i 
that defines the similarity matrix S = XX
⊤
.
B.3 Diagnosis
The diagnosis prompt implements I
t 
= rank
val
(t, {τ
g
}
G
g=1
) ∪ rank
con
(t, {τ
g
}
G
g=1
) (§4.2). The workspace
presents the agent with the original task, the shared harness used by every rollout, and G rollout directories.
The agent executes a five-step workflow, comprising per-trajectory inspection, failure-mode analysis
(self-validation), cross-trajectory disagreement analysis (self-consistency), a single high-level harness
improvement direction, and a severity score that doubles as a soft attention weight downstream. The
structured JSON output binds each field to a fixed slot so optimize can attend by severity.
Listing 3 The diagnosis prompt.
Analyze three solve trajectories for the same task.
The harness (harness/) is a toolkit of resources and guidance that helps the
,→ agent solve tasks. It can contain any type of file - helper scripts,
,→ artifacts, environment setup, documentation with relevant context, and
,→ workflows to follow.
Workspace layout:
task/ - the original task. Read task/prompt.md to understand the
,→ question.
harness/ - the shared harness used by all three trajectories.
trajectory_0/ - first solve attempt. Contains events.jsonl,
,→ final_message.txt, and workspace_diff/.
trajectory_1/ - second solve attempt. Contains events.jsonl,
,→ final_message.txt, and workspace_diff/.
trajectory_2/ - third solve attempt. Contains events.jsonl,
,→ final_message.txt, and workspace_diff/.
Your job is to analyze and evaluate the three trajectories. Follow this
,→ workflow:
## Step 1: Inspect each trajectory

For each of trajectory_0, trajectory_1, and trajectory_2:
1. Inspect final_message.txt and events.jsonl to understand the action and
,→ decision process.
2. Evaluate whether the trajectory accurately and efficiently completed the
,→ task.
3. Set successful to 1 if the trajectory accurately completed the task,
,→ otherwise set it to 0.
4. In quality_analysis, note what evidence, files, tools, or reasoning steps
,→ the trajectory relied on, and whether there was unnecessary work, missed
,→ information, misleading evidence, or an incorrect decision.
## Step 2: Analyze failure modes
If all three trajectories accurately and efficiently completed the task, this
,→ section can be brief. Otherwise, analyze why one or more trajectories
,→ failed or performed poorly. Make this analysis faithful and actionable.
,→ Ground it in what the trajectories actually did.
## Step 3: Analyze inconsistency
Compare the three event sequences and final answers. Identify whether there are
,→ inconsistencies among them: where and why the trajectories diverged, and
,→ how those differences affected the behavior.
## Step 4: Summarize harness improvement direction
Suggest one high-level, simple direction for improving the harness. This should
,→ be a general improvement direction based on the trajectory analysis, not a
,→ detailed edit plan and not a task-specific hardcoded fix.
## Step 5: Assign severity
Set severity to a float from 0.0 to 1.0 for how strongly this task should
,→ influence the next harness optimization:
- 0.0: no meaningful issue; all trajectories answered accurately and
,→ efficiently.
- 0.1-0.3: minor inefficiency or weak concern; do not optimize from this alone.
- 0.4-0.7: mixed success, inconsistency, or a plausible harness gap.
- 0.8-1.0: clear failure, missing information, or a high-confidence harness
,→ issue.
## Output format
Your final message must be exactly one JSON object (no markdown fences, no
,→ other text):
{
"task_id": "<task id, if available from the task prompt or context>",
"severity": 0.0,
"trajectory_analyses": [
{
"trajectory": "trajectory_0",
"successful": 1,
"quality_analysis": "<faithful analysis of whether this trajectory
,→ completed the task accurately and efficiently>",
"issues": "<any missed information, misleading evidence, inefficiency, or
,→ incorrect decision; empty string if none>"
},
{
"trajectory": "trajectory_1",
"successful": 1,
"quality_analysis": "<faithful analysis of whether this trajectory
,→ completed the task accurately and efficiently>",
"issues": "<any missed information, misleading evidence, inefficiency, or
,→ incorrect decision; empty string if none>"
},
{
"trajectory": "trajectory_2",

"successful": 1,
"quality_analysis": "<faithful analysis of whether this trajectory
,→ completed the task accurately and efficiently>",
"issues": "<any missed information, misleading evidence, inefficiency, or
,→ incorrect decision; empty string if none>"
}
],
"failure_mode_analysis": "<actionable analysis in markdown of why any
,→ trajectory failed or performed poorly; brief if none failed>",
"inconsistency_analysis": "<root-cause analysis in markdown of where and why
,→ the trajectories diverged, and how that affected quality>",
"harness_improvement_direction": "<one high-level, simple direction for
,→ improving the harness>"
}
The trajectory directories carry the full event stream, the agent’s final message, and any workspace diff
produced by the rollout. The −self-validation and −self-consistency ablations in Table 4
remove the corresponding step and the corresponding output field, and the surrounding scaffolding is
left intact.
B.4 Optimization
The optimization prompt implements h
j 
= optimize(h
0
, {I
t
}
t∈D
core 
) (§4.3). The editor agent is given
write access to a fresh copy of the harness and a directory of per-task diagnoses sorted by severity. The
instruction frames severity as a soft attention weight, requires cross-task pattern matching before any edit,
and discourages task-specific hardcoded fixes. Each of the N candidates is sampled independently with
the same prompt, and randomness from the underlying agent supplies the diversity.
Listing 4 The optimize prompt.
Based on the per-task diagnoses in diagnoses/, analyze and optimize the current
,→ harness/ to improve performance on future tasks. "Better performance"
,→ means the agent’s final answer more directly and correctly answers what
,→ each task asks, with fewer wasted steps.
The harness (harness/) is a toolkit of resources and guidance that helps the
,→ agent solve tasks. It can contain any type of file - helper scripts,
,→ artifacts, environment setup, documentation with relevant context, and
,→ workflows to follow.
Workspace layout:
harness/ - the current harness; you may directly modify it
,→ (add/remove/edit any files)
diagnoses/ - one subdirectory per task, each containing:
- diagnosis.md - structured trajectory analysis, severity, failure modes,
,→ inconsistency analysis, and a high-level harness improvement direction
- prompt.md - the original task for context
## Steps
1. Read each diagnosis in diagnoses/task_XXXX/diagnosis.md and the
,→ corresponding prompt.md.
2. Use Severity as a soft attention weight from 0.00 to 1.00, not as ground
,→ truth. Higher severity means the diagnosis should influence optimization
,→ more strongly.
3. Look for patterns across diagnoses - are multiple tasks failing for similar
,→ reasons?
4. Prioritize high-severity recurring failure modes and high-severity recurring
,→ inconsistency root causes.
5. Low-severity tasks usually should not cause a harness edit by themselves
,→ unless the same issue motif recurs across tasks.
6. Make surgical improvements to harness/ that address the high-level diagnosed
,→ issues.

When done, send the changes and your rationale as your final message. If you
,→ made no changes, explain why the current harness is already sufficient.
Each diagnoses/task_XXXX/ subdirectory holds the serialized diagnosis JSON rendered as Mark-
down alongside the original task prompt. Subdirectories are indexed in descending severity so the agent
encounters the most consequential diagnoses first.
B.5 Pairwise Ranking
The ranking prompt implements rank(t, τ
a
, τ
b
) ∈ [−10, 10] used in Best-of-N acceptance (§4.3 and
Algorithm 1). The evaluator sees the task, the two harnesses, and the two trajectories. The candidate
trajectory is presented as trajectory_A and the baseline as trajectory_B, and the orchestrator
negates the returned integer so the scalar score is oriented as baseline → candidate regardless of
presentation order. Presenting the candidate first reduces a later-option preference bias we observed in
pilot runs. The rubric below uses an integer scale in [−10, 10], and downstream only the sign and relative
magnitude of the score are used (§3).
Listing 5 The rank prompt used in Best-of-N acceptance.
Analyze the difference in performance between harness A and harness B on the
,→ same task. You will see one task/ directory (containing prompt.md) and two
,→ trajectory_*/ directories (each containing events.jsonl and
,→ final_message.txt). Produce a JSON object scoring the A -> B transition on
,→ an integer scale from -10 to +10 with a short rationale.
The harness (harness/) is a toolkit of resources and guidance that helps the
,→ agent solve tasks. It can contain any type of file - helper scripts,
,→ artifacts, environment setup, documentation with relevant context, and
,→ workflows to follow.
Scoring rubric:
- +10: A -> B is a change from unacceptable to excellent; B’s trajectory is
,→ efficient and its answer is correct.
- 0: A and B perform comparably, or it is not possible to determine which is
,→ better.
- -10: A -> B is a severe regression; B’s trajectory is inefficient and its
,→ answer is wrong.
Workspace layout:
task/ - the original task (prompt.md is the question)
harness_A/ - the harness used by trajectory A
harness_B/ - the harness used by trajectory B
trajectory_A/ - trajectory from harness A (final_message.txt is the
,→ answer)
trajectory_B/ - trajectory from harness B (final_message.txt is the
,→ answer)
## Evaluation steps
1. Read task/prompt.md to understand what the task requires.
2. Read and compare trajectory_A and trajectory_B.
Your final reply must be exactly one JSON object (no markdown fences, no other
,→ text):
{"value": <integer in [-10, 10]>, "rationale": "<one-sentence rationale>"}
The candidate score S
j 
in Algorithm 1 averages this integer (with the orientation flip described above)
over the coreset D
core
, and the candidate is accepted only when S
j 
> 0, otherwise the harness remains at
h
0
.

C Hyperparameters and Infrastructure
Table 6 lists every hyperparameter and infrastruc-
ture setting used in our experiments. Values al-
ready reported in the main text (Section 3 and Sec-
tion 5.1) are reproduced here for convenience, and
values not previously stated are introduced here.
The intent is an audit-ready specification, with one
column per parameter, one value per cell, and no
defaults left implicit. Dataset-specific overrides
on solver wall-clock and grading are deferred to
Appendix E, and prompt text for every agent role
is in Appendix B.
Several choices in Table 6 warrant brief justi-
fication. We set G = 3 because three rollouts
are enough for the diagnosis prompt to surface
cross-trajectory disagreements, and pilots with
larger G inflated cost linearly without sharpen-
ing the diagnosis signal. We weight the DPP at
θ = 0.7 so that difficulty dominates diversity,
on the principle that an unselected easy task car-
ries less optimization signal than a redundant hard
one. Concretely, θ enters through the difficulty
weights er
i 
= 
 
max(r
i
, ϵ) / max
j 
max(r
j 
, ϵ)

α
with α = θ/

2(1 − θ)

, and the factor of two
offsets the difficulty term’s doubled appearance in
log det K, so that θ and 1 − θ weight the difficulty
and diversity terms directly. We make the accep-
tance gate strictly positive rather than non-negative
because pairwise self-preference is a noisy estima-
tor, and breaking ties in favor of change would
inflate regression risk for no expected gain. Finally,
we use the same Codex gpt-5.5 backbone for
solver, optimizer, and ranker, since decoupling the
solver from the judge would introduce a confound
where measured held-out gains could be attributed
to a stronger judge rather than to RHO itself. Per-
dataset configuration overrides referenced above
are in Appendix E, and baseline-specific configura-
tions are in Appendix F.
D Pipeline Implementation Details
This appendix documents the design choices that
govern RHO’s behavior but do not appear in §4
or Algorithm 1. The equations and operator signa-
tures are fixed by the main text, and what follows
are the mechanics that make them executable.
D.1 Harness Representation and Mounting
A harness is a directory of files with no fixed
schema, where prose instructions, executable
scripts, and structured configuration sit side by side.
At every operator call the harness is materialized
as a subdirectory of the agent’s working directory,
and the agent reads it the same way it reads task
files rather than as a system-prompt prefix. The
solve operator mounts the harness read-only by
convention, while optimize mounts a fresh copy
with write access and accepts whatever the agent
leaves behind on the filesystem. Harnesses are
compared by content, so if optimize returns a
harness identical to the input, the candidate is
treated as a no-op and dropped before evaluation.
This keeps the harness surface tool-agnostic and
lets the optimizer extend any of the three file kinds
without a representation change.
D.2 Role Separation and Workspace Isolation
The same backbone executes solve, the diagnosis
analysis (rank
val
/rank
con
), optimize, and rank.
Role separation is achieved by workspace contents
rather than by changing the backbone, where each
operator runs in a fresh workspace that contains
only the inputs it should see. solve sees the
task files and the current harness. The diagnosis
analysis sees the task and the group of trajectories
for that task. optimize sees the harness directory,
the diagnosis instructions, and the trajectory
rollouts that motivated them. Finally, rank sees the
task, two trajectories, and both candidate harness
directories side by side. Per-role ablation therefore
amounts to swapping prompts and inputs, not mod-
els, which keeps the operators directly comparable.
D.3 Order, Parsing, and Failure Handling in
Pairwise Ranking
rank 
is invoked once per (task, candidate) pair.
We present the candidate trajectory first and
the baseline trajectory second, then negate the
parsed scalar. This swap is a standard mitigation
for position bias in pairwise judges, applied
without per-call order randomization. The judge is
constrained to return a single integer in [−10, 10]
with a one-sentence rationale, and we do not retry.
Any parse or execution failure deterministically
yields zero. This makes rank a strict pessimist,
since silent failures pull the mean toward the
rejection threshold rather than away from it.
D.4 Diagnosis vs. Ranking Inputs
The diagnosis analysis consumes the full group of
G rollouts for one task and produces a single tex-
tual instruction I with a severity weight, whereas
rank is strictly pairwise. We do not collapse a

Table 6: Hyperparameters and infrastructure for RHO. Parameters appearing in the main text are marked with a 
†
and are restated here for completeness only.
Parameter Value Description
Backbone agent
Model
† 
Codex gpt-5.5 Shared across solve, optimize, and rank.
Reasoning effort
† 
high Applied to all roles uniformly.
Sampling temperature provider default Codex reasoning models do not expose temperature.
Provider Cloud-hosted gpt-5.5 (Codex CLI) Single hosted endpoint.
Coreset selection
Selector DPP, greedy MAP (Kulesza and Taskar, 2012).
Coreset size k
† 
10 Train tasks.
DPP weight θ
† 
0.7 Difficulty/diversity tradeoff.
Score floor ϵ 0.1 Lower bound on normalized difficulty.
Judge model Codex gpt-5.5, high Same backbone as the solver.
Trajectory-digest budget 10,000 BPE tokens, head/tail truncation Ground-truth-revealing commands scrubbed.
Fingerprint embedding BAAI/bge-large-en-v1.5, 1024-d Executed locally (Xiao et al., 2023).
Group rollout
Rollouts per task G 3 Parallel solves under h
0 
per coreset task.
Solve wall-clock timeout 900 s Dataset overrides in Appendix E.
Diagnosis prompt see Appendix B Self-validation + self-consistency cues.
Severity range [0, 1] Soft attention weight, not a hard threshold.
Best-of-N harness proposal
Candidates N 
† 
3 Parallel optimizer samples.
Optimizer prompt see Appendix B Conditioned on {I
t
}
t∈D
core 
.
Ranking timeout 300 s per pairwise call Per rank(t, τ
a
, τ
b
).
Acceptance threshold S
j 
> 0 (strict) Mean pairwise score over the coreset.
Infrastructure
Agent-call concurrency 10 concurrent calls (cap 30) Parallelism for Table 1 runs.
Rounds per experiment 1 Unless stated otherwise.
Persistence full logs to disk Prompts, completions, trajectories, diagnoses,
candidate harnesses, diffs, scores, run summaries.
group into a Bradley–Terry score for evaluation.
For each candidate, we pair the candidate’s rollout
of a task against a fixed baseline trajectory drawn
from the original group, and we hold this baseline
constant across every candidate so the comparison
stays anchored to the same reference. The conse-
quence is that G > 1 enters the pipeline as a diag-
nostic device only, since it sharpens the instruction
I through cross-trajectory inconsistency but does
not vote on which candidate wins.
D.5 Optimizer Action Space
optimize is a code-agent invocation, not a con-
strained text rewriter. It sees the materialized har-
ness as a filesystem and may add, remove, or mod-
ify any file inside it. We hand it the diagnosis
instructions sorted by descending severity, with
severity exposed as a soft attention weight in [0, 1]
rather than a hard priority queue, so the agent can
still merge or skip suggestions that conflict. We
do not parse a diff out of the agent’s final message,
and the new harness state is recovered from the di-
rectory itself when the call returns. This keeps the
action space identical to the representation, where
anything that fits in a directory is a valid edit.
D.6 Acceptance Gate and No-Ops
An update is accepted only when the best can-
didate’s mean pairwise score over the coreset is
strictly positive, and a mean of zero is rejected. Be-
fore the gate, a candidate is dropped if the optimizer
failed, the call timed out, or the produced harness is
identical to the input. If every candidate is dropped,
or every surviving candidate scores S
j 
≤ 0, RHO
leaves the harness unchanged. This no-update be-
havior is part of the result rather than a tooling
failure. In Figure 5, selectors whose coreset fails
to expose useful weaknesses (pure coverage, pure
difficulty) leave held-out accuracy near the Vanilla
Codex baseline.

D.7 Persistence
We persist the input harness id, along with the tra-
jectories produced by each operator (solve, the di-
agnosis analysis, optimize, and rank) identified
by id. We further persist the diagnosis instruc-
tion, the candidate harness ids together with their
diffs against the input, the per-candidate pairwise
scores, the mean pairwise score, and the accept
flag. Every stored trajectory carries its full event
stream, final message, workspace diff, and wall-
clock time. These records are what makes down-
stream audit, re-grading, and ablation possible with-
out re-running the agent.
E Dataset Specifications
This appendix documents what we take from each
upstream benchmark, how we split it, what the
agent sees at solve time, and how grading runs.
Pinned upstream commits make the partition and
grader reproducible from a clean checkout.
E.1 SWE-Bench Pro
SWE-Bench Pro (Deng et al., 2025) is the long-
horizon software-engineering benchmark in our
suite. Tasks resolve only when a multi-file patch
passes the upstream test set, and failure modes are
therefore concrete and traceable to the harness’s
repository conventions and build commands.
Source. We load the test split of
ScaleAI/SWE-bench_Pro from Hugging
Face. Evaluator scripts and per-instance
Docker images come from the official
scaleapi/SWE-bench_Pro-os reposi-
tory, pinned to a fixed commit.
1
Split. Rows are ordered by the SHA-256 hash
of (seed, instance_id) with the seed fixed.
The first 100 form the training pool and the next
100 the held-out test pool, and the remaining rows
are unused. We report on the held-out test pool.
Solve interface. Each task materializes a prompt
file describing the issue plus a fresh clone of the
upstream repository at its base commit, mounted
in the workspace. The agent edits repository files
in place, and no extra tools are injected.
Grading. We extract the agent’s patch by re-
applying its workspace edits to a fresh checkout and
taking git diff -binary. If the workspace
path fails, we fall back to scanning the agent’s fi-
nal message for fenced diff blocks. Binary hunks
and auto-generated paths (dependency, cache, and
1
Commit 0c64e26f00b9.
build directories) are stripped before scoring. The
patch is then applied inside the official per-instance
Docker image distributed by the SWE-Bench Pro
authors, and the official run and parser scripts are
invoked. A task passes iff every FAIL_TO_PASS
and PASS_TO_PASS test resolves correctly. The
Docker wall-clock budget is one hour per task.
E.2 Terminal-Bench 2
Terminal-Bench 2 (Merrill et al., 2026) contains
executable command-line tasks. Failure is a missed
reward, not a missed convention, so the harness
mostly buys consistency in how the agent inspects
state and chains commands.
Source. We use the upstream Terminal-Bench 2
repository at a fixed commit
2
, yielding 89 tasks.
Split. Tasks are hash-ordered with the same seeded
scheme as SWE-Bench Pro. The first 30 form the
training pool, the remaining 59 the held-out pool.
Solve interface. Each task spins up a fresh Docker
container whose image is declared by the task. Con-
tainers carry a cleanup label and per-task CPU and
memory limits. The agent’s host workspace is bind-
mounted inside the container. The solve prompt
instructs the agent to author shell scripts on the
host and execute them inside the container. A wall-
clock watchdog terminates the container when the
task’s declared agent timeout elapses.
Grading. We run the task’s upstream test suite
inside the still-running container under its declared
verifier timeout. The verifier writes a reward of 0
or 1 to a known path. A task passes iff the reward
equals 1. We apply no difficulty filter, so held-out
numbers span the upstream difficulty mix.
Data integrity. The solve prompt instructs the
agent not to read the test directory, the upstream
solution, or the verifier log. This is a prompt-level
convention, not a sandbox restriction. We docu-
ment it for transparency, since a sufficiently ad-
versarial agent could read the verifier and game
the reward. We rely on the held-out pool and Ta-
ble 1’s cross-benchmark consistency to detect such
behavior, and we have not observed it.
E.3 GAIA-2
GAIA-2 (Froger et al., 2026) differs from the
two coding benchmarks in that the environment
evolves independently of the agent. The harness
layer therefore has to encode behavior under
2
Commit 53ff2b87d621.

partial observation and asynchronous events, not
just stable build conventions.
Source. We load the validation split of the GAIA-2
release on Hugging Face under the mini configu-
ration, yielding 200 scenarios. Each scenario ships
an asynchronous event stream and an upstream
write-action verifier.
Split. Scenarios are hash-ordered with the same
seeded scheme. The first 100 form the training
pool, and the remainder, 100, form the held-out
pool. We report on the held-out slice.
Solve interface. Each scenario’s workspace
contains a task prompt, a tool dispatcher, and a
tool catalog. The agent invokes tools through a
single shell command per call. The dispatcher
relays each call to a sidecar process running the
upstream environment, which advances simulated
time and replays scheduled events. The scenario’s
ground-truth state is held entirely by the sidecar,
and the agent never reads it.
Grading. When the agent finishes, the sidecar
invokes the scenario’s upstream verifier. The judge
LLM is the same Codex gpt-5.5 backbone we
use elsewhere, and routing defaults to the same
Azure Foundry endpoint. A scenario passes iff the
upstream verifier reports success.
Environment modifications. Two changes to the
upstream environment affect reported numbers and
must be disclosed. First, the upstream cap of
one send_message_to_user call per turn is
raised to four, since the original cap penalizes ver-
bose agents that would otherwise complete the task
correctly. Second, three optional judge-relaxation
switches (event filtering, relaxed per-app UI judg-
ing, and trivial filesystem-read filtering) are avail-
able as ablation axes but are all disabled in the
experiments reported in Table 1.
F Baseline Implementations
Every baseline runs under the same Codex
gpt-5.5 backbone at high reasoning effort.
The trajectory-only family (Dynamic Cheatsheet,
ReasoningBank, and Sleep-time Compute) shares
RHO’s Coreset Selection budget of 10 training
tasks and 3 candidates. Baselines differ only in
what the offline phase persists and how the solver
consumes it. This appendix documents each.
F.1 Dynamic Cheatsheet (Suzgun et al., 2025)
Dynamic Cheatsheet curates a running list of
reusable facts and procedures harvested from past
trajectories.
Persistence layer. A single markdown file lives in-
side the harness, structured as <memory_item>
blocks containing a description, a worked example,
and a usage count.
Offline phase. A curator agent iterates over the se-
lected training tasks in order. For each task it reads
the current cheatsheet plus the solve transcript and
rewrites the cheatsheet in place.
Online consumption. The cheatsheet is part of the
harness, and the solver reads it as part of normal
harness lookup. No additional prompt prefix is
injected.
Faithfulness. Upstream Dynamic Cheatsheet up-
dates the cheatsheet after every task, so the next
task’s solver sees the update. Our default configu-
ration runs solves for all selected training tasks be-
fore invoking the curator, then commits one cheat-
sheet. The single-task configuration that matches
the upstream per-example update is available as a
sensitivity setting, while Table 1 uses the default.
F.2 ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2025)
ReasoningBank stores reusable reasoning patterns
extracted from past trajectories and retrieves them
on demand at inference time.
Persistence layer. A JSONL bank of items, each
with title, description, body, and a precomputed
embedding. The bank lives outside the harness
directory because solve-time access is by similarity
retrieval, not by harness materialization.
Offline phase. For each selected training task we
solve it, ask the judge whether the trajectory was
successful, then run an extraction prompt that dis-
tills reusable reasoning patterns from the trajectory.
Extracted items are appended to the bank, and em-
beddings are computed locally.
Online consumption. At each held-out solve, we
encode the task description with the same encoder,
retrieve the top-n items by cosine similarity, render
them as a memory preamble prepended to the solve
instructions. Top-n is fixed at 1.
Faithfulness. We replace the upstream Gemini
embedding with BAAI/bge-large-en-v1.5
(Xiao et al., 2023), a 1024-dimensional locally
executed sentence encoder, so that every baseline
that uses retrieval shares the same encoder,
dimensionality, and storage backend. This removes
a confound between memory-bank quality and
embedding-provider quality.

F.3 Sleep-time Compute (Lin et al., 2025)
Sleep-time Compute preprocesses past traces into
compact notes that are prepended to the agent’s
context at inference time, following the Letta im-
plementation (Packer et al., 2023).
Persistence layer. A set of bounded markdown
memory blocks stored inside the harness, edited
with structured edit tools (insert, replace, rethink,
finish) that mirror upstream Letta semantics.
Offline phase. A sleep-time agent iterates over
the selected training tasks. For each task it reads
the task’s prompt and trajectories, then issues a
sequence of memory-edit tool calls to update the
harness’s memory blocks. The system prompt is
the upstream Letta system prompt, used verbatim.
Online consumption. The solver reads the mem-
ory blocks as part of the harness, the same way it
reads any harness file.
Scope. Edits accumulate across tasks, and the
sleep-time agent works against a single evolving
memory state task after task. We do not reset
memory between training tasks.
F.4 Meta-Harness (Lee et al., 2026)
Meta-Harness is the validation-feedback reference,
where a meta-agent rewrites the harness, and the
rewrites are scored against a labeled validation set.
Persistence layer. A sequence of candidate harness
directories paired with a search history recording
per-candidate validation pass rates.
Offline phase. An outer loop alternates be-
tween a proposer that reads the search history
and emits a new harness, and an evaluator that
grades the proposed harness on the search-task
set using the dataset’s ground-truth grader. Our
re-implementation’s default budget is 20 outer it-
erations × 3 candidates per iteration × 2 solve
trials per task, far above the budget we give RHO;
upstream reports evaluating roughly 60 candidate
harnesses over 20 iterations.
Validation-feedback footprint. The proposer
reads each candidate’s per-task scores, mean score,
and pass rate from the history, and the grader
signal directly shapes the next proposal. This is the
hallmark of the validation-feedback family and the
axis along which Meta-Harness is incomparable
to the trajectory-only baselines.
Matched-budget configuration. For Table 2 we
run the outer loop for one iteration with 3 candi-
dates and 1 solve trial per task, so the candidate
count matches RHO’s N = 3. The validation-
grade cost is what Table 2 reports.
Shared configuration. All four baselines and
RHO start from the same empty harness for a
given dataset, use the same coreset of selected
training tasks, and are graded against the same
held-out split with the same grader. The only
deliberate axis of variation is what the offline
phase persists and how the solver consumes it.
Meta-Harness additionally consumes validation
grades, and this is the axis Table 2 measures.
G Optimization-Phase Compute Cost
This appendix documents the optimization-phase
compute cost of RHO and the baselines reported in
Table 1 and Table 2. We report the numbers with-
out claiming an efficiency advantage. Among the
trajectory-only methods at matched coreset budget
(k = 10, N = 3), RHO sits in the same order of
magnitude as Sleep-time Compute and Dynamic
Cheatsheet, and is more expensive than Reason-
ingBank. The matched-budget Meta-Harness con-
figuration is the only baseline whose cost is quali-
tatively different, and its upstream-default budget
would be larger still, as we discuss at the end.
G.1 Accounting Scope
Every method dispatches two kinds of model calls
during the offline phase, plus the same per-task
solve at evaluation time. We count them separately
because they go through different backends and
have different unit costs.
Codex (agent) invocations. One Codex CLI sub-
process that runs to completion is one agent invoca-
tion. Each invocation persists a trajectory directory
recording the role (one of solve, diagnose, opti-
mize, rank), the harness id, the task id, the wall-
clock duration, and the exit status. We obtain the
per-method totals by counting these directories.
Auxiliary LLM calls. A single direct API call
to the same gpt-5.5 backbone, issued outside
the Codex CLI. Only ReasoningBank uses these
in the offline phase, namely two per training task,
for success judgment and memory-item extraction.
Coreset selection also issues one auxiliary LLM
call per candidate task before any method starts.
This cost is shared across methods at matched core-
set and is reported once at the end of this appendix.
Embedding calls. ReasoningBank
and DPP coreset selection both call
BAAI/bge-large-en-v1.5 (Xiao et al.,
2023) for fingerprint or query embedding. We

Table 7: Agent invocations by role for the optimization phase on SWE-Bench Pro (k = 10 train tasks, M
test 
= 100
held-out tasks). ROLLOUT is G parallel solves per coreset task, AFTER is one solve per candidate per coreset task,
RANK is one pairwise rank per candidate per coreset task, and TEST is one solve per held-out task. Counts are read
directly from the persisted trajectory directories, and LLM reports auxiliary chat-completion calls.
Method rollout diagnose optimize after rank test total llm
Vanilla Codex 0 0 0 0 0 100 100 0
ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2025) 10 0 0 0 0 100 110 20
Dynamic Cheatsheet (Suzgun et al., 2025) 30 0 10 10 10 100 160 0
Sleep-time Compute (Lin et al., 2025) 30 0 30 30 30 100 220 0
RHO 30 10 3 30 30 100 203 0
execute the encoder locally, so these calls do not
hit a remote endpoint and are not aggregated with
the LLM totals.
G.2 Per-Method Decomposition
Table 7 breaks down the optimization phase on
SWE-Bench Pro (k = 10 train tasks, M
test 
=
100 
held-out tasks) into agent invocations by role.
Terminal-Bench 2 differs only in M
test 
= 59,
while GAIA-2 matches SWE-Bench Pro.
The table is a literal accounting of how each
method spends its offline budget. ReasoningBank
issues one solve per training task and never
proposes a candidate harness, so the offline
phase costs only k = 10 extra Codex invocations
on top of the held-out evaluation, and its 2k
auxiliary LLM calls are the success judge and the
memory-item extractor. Dynamic Cheatsheet and
Sleep-time Compute both roll out each training
task G = 3 times to surface variance, then run an
optimizer agent. Dynamic Cheatsheet invokes a
single curator over all k tasks (N =1 candidate),
while Sleep-time Compute runs one edit pass per
task per restart (3 restarts × k tasks = 30 optimize
calls). Both then commit each unique candidate
harness through the after-solve and pairwise-rank
steps shared with RHO. RHO’s footprint differs
from Sleep-time Compute’s only by trading
30 − 3 = 27 per-task optimize calls for 10
diagnose calls plus the 3 candidate-level optimize
calls in the best-of-N proposer, and the after-solve
and rank phases are identical at N = 3 candidates.
G.3 Wall-Clock Time
Table 8 reports two complementary wall-clock
measurements per (method, dataset) cell. Σ
codex
is the sum of per-invocation wall-clock over every
agent invocation in the run, and it is the cost of
running the same workload serially on one agent
process. End-to-end is the elapsed time from the
run’s start to its completion, under our infrastruc-
ture setting of 10 concurrent agent calls and 10
concurrent graders. The ratio between the two
columns reflects how much of the workload was
successfully parallelized, where the trajectory-only
methods reach 5–10× speedup, while Reasoning-
Bank reaches 3.5–4.5× because its offline phase
is sequential by construction (each training task’s
solve must commit to memory before the next
task’s retrieval). Meta-Harness is a validation-
feedback rather than a trajectory-only method, so
we report its budget separately in §G.4, not here.
Two observations are worth stating explicitly.
First, per-invocation cost varies by more than 2×
across datasets (GAIA-2 averages around 150 s per
invocation, Terminal-Bench 2 around 300 s, SWE-
Bench Pro around 400 s), so an agent-call count
is informative only within a dataset, and cost can-
not be compared across datasets by summing invo-
cation counts alone. Second, at matched coreset
and N = 3, RHO is within ±4% of Sleep-time
Compute on every dataset, more expensive than
Dynamic Cheatsheet (which uses N = 1), and
substantially more expensive than ReasoningBank
(which performs no group rollout, no candidate
proposal, no pairwise rank).
G.4 Matched-Budget Meta-Harness
Meta-Harness has a qualitatively larger compute
footprint because validation grades feed back into
the proposer. At its upstream default (I = 20
outer iterations, C = 3 candidates per iteration,
T = 2 solve trials per task) the offline phase alone
would cost I(1+CM
search
T )+M
search
T ≈ 1,210
agent invocations on SWE-Bench Pro — nearly
twelve times RHO’s optimization-phase count of
103. The matched-budget configuration we report
in Table 2 reduces this to I = 1, C = 3, T = 1,
amounting to M
search
T + I(1 + CM
search
T ) =
10 + 31 = 41 optimization-phase invocations;
this is the configuration whose held-out pass rate
(0.62 on SWE-Bench Pro) is reported alongside

Table 8: Wall-clock cost per run, by dataset. Σ
codex 
is the sum of per-invocation wall-clock over all agent invocations
(i.e. the cost on one Codex subprocess), and end-to-end is the elapsed time from run start to completion under
10-way agent concurrency and 10-way grader concurrency. Hours.
SWE-Bench Pro Terminal-Bench 2 GAIA-2
Method Σ
codex 
end-to-end Σ
codex 
end-to-end Σ
codex 
end-to-end
Vanilla Codex 9.4 1.1 4.3 0.6 4.2 0.6
ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2025) 17.5 4.6 8.0 2.4 7.2 2.0
Dynamic Cheatsheet (Suzgun et al., 2025) 17.9 2.5 10.8 1.9 6.5 1.2
Sleep-time Compute (Lin et al., 2025) 22.2 3.2 14.5 2.2 7.0 1.2
RHO 23.1 3.2 15.5 2.5 9.2 1.4
RHO’s in the main text. The 10-round configu-
ration reported in the same table keeps C = 3,
T = 1 but raises I to 10, giving 10 + 10 · 31 =
320 optimization-phase invocations (3.1× RHO’s
optimization-phase count of 103). These counts
exclude the shared M
test 
= 100 held-out evalua-
tion, which every method pays once regardless of
optimizer. Because Meta-Harness is a validation-
feedback rather than a trajectory-only method, it
is not included in the wall-clock comparison of
Table 8.
G.5 Coreset Selection Cost (Shared)
Coreset selection runs once before any method’s
offline phase begins. For SWE-Bench Pro this
consumes 100 auxiliary LLM calls (one difficulty
judgment per candidate task) plus one batched
embedding call over the same 100 fingerprints,
after which the selected k = 10 task ids are
persisted and reused verbatim by every baseline.
This cost is paid once per dataset and is not
attributed to any individual method.

H Optimized Harness Artifacts
This appendix reproduces, verbatim, the complete contents of the highest-scoring harness RHO produced
on each benchmark, i.e. the harnesses summarized in Figure 3. Each harness is a directory of Markdown
instruction and skill files together with executable tool scripts; every file is shown in full, with no
abridgement. Files are grouped by benchmark and labeled with their path inside the harness directory and
their role (instruction, skill, or tool).
H.1 SWE-Bench Pro
Listing 6 SWE-Bench Pro harness: README.md (instructions)
# SWE-bench Repair Harness
Use this harness before editing and before finalizing a task. The goal is to
make the final patch answer the exact prompt, not just compile.
## Default Workflow
1. Read the prompt as a contract. Write a short requirement ledger covering:
exact public names, file paths, payload shapes, errors/status codes,
default values, supported backends/platforms, and called-out edge cases.
2. Look for an existing reference when the task sounds like a known fix:
local git history, tags, upstream commits, tests, fixtures, or nearby
implementation patterns. Prefer adapting proven behavior over guessing.
3. Trace the real path end to end before editing. Follow stored data back to
user-visible artifacts, config values back to their runtime representation,
and wrappers back to the implementation that actually executes.
4. Make the smallest production-source change that satisfies the contract.
Keep generated files, caches, temporary smoke tests, and local environment
output out of the submitted diff.
5. Verify executable behavior. Syntax checks are not enough: run at least one
focused smoke that calls every new public route/function/method and covers
each explicit failure/edge condition in the prompt.
6. Re-open the requirement ledger before the final answer. Check literal API
names, response shapes, defaults, cleanup behavior, and every backend or
platform named by the prompt.
## Tools
- ‘harness/bin/repair-verify‘ discovers common non-PATH toolchains, runs cheap
language checks, reports generated artifacts, and accepts extra task-specific
commands.
- ‘harness/checklists/contract-verification.md‘ is the detailed checklist for
requirement-led smoke tests and final review.
Typical use:
‘‘‘bash
../harness/bin/repair-verify repo
../harness/bin/repair-verify repo -- go test ./lib/events ./lib/service
../harness/bin/repair-verify repo --clean-pycache -- python -m compileall -q lib
‘‘‘
If project dependencies are unavailable, still write a tiny direct smoke with
local stubs for the changed layer. The smoke should execute the contract shape
that hidden tests are likely to assert.
Listing 7 SWE-Bench Pro harness: checklists/contract-verification.md (skill)
# Contract Verification Checklist
Use this as a final gate for each repair. High-severity misses in prior runs
came from not executing the exact prompt contract.
## Requirement Ledger

- Copy exact interface names from the prompt: type/function/method names,
struct fields, route paths, config keys, defaults, error strings, and payload
shapes.
- Mark each requirement with one of: implemented, intentionally unchanged with
reason, or blocked with observed evidence.
- Re-check literal wording before finalizing. Hidden tests often compile
against exact names such as ‘StreamEmitter‘, ‘getRaw‘, ‘BackoffDuration‘, or
‘durationSeconds‘.
## Behavioral Smoke Tests
- Exercise every new public entry point directly, not only syntax or import
checks. For web/API work, call the controller or route layer and assert the
response body shape and error translation.
- Cover negative paths from the prompt: missing records, denied privileges,
full queues, closed emitters, deleted resources, unsupported platforms,
expired deadlines, failed backends, and boundary positions.
- For state machines, assert transitions at start, middle, end, stopped,
paused/playing, and invalid input boundaries.
- For data import/parsing tasks, compare complete real fixture outputs against
expected outputs. Synthetic examples are useful only after at least one real
regression fixture passes exactly.
- For filesystem/data-cleanup tasks, trace generated or transformed artifacts.
If the stored record is normalized, test the visible/generated filename too.
- For configurable behavior, test the runtime config value shape used by the
project, including string values like ‘"0"‘ and ‘"1"‘ when applicable.
- For multi-backend features, smoke every named backend/path and every explicit
selector value. Do not validate only the backend that is easiest to run.
## Language/Repo Recipes
- Go: search for ‘/tmp/go/bin/go‘ and ‘/tmp/go/bin/gofmt‘ before declaring Go
unavailable. Run gofmt on touched files, focused package tests, and compile
cross-platform build-tag paths when the prompt mentions a platform.
- Python: run ‘python -m py_compile‘ or ‘compileall‘ on touched files, then a
direct smoke for changed behavior. Remove ‘__pycache__‘, ‘.pyc‘,
,→ ‘.pytest_cache‘,
and test environment artifacts before finalizing.
- JavaScript/TypeScript: syntax/type checks do not catch missing runtime imports
or wrong response shapes. Add a small Node smoke with stubs for changed app,
controller, or model methods when full dependencies are missing.
- Missing-file tasks: search local/upstream history for the target file and its
tests. Run the narrow package or upstream tests after adapting the file.
## Final Diff Hygiene
- Run ‘git diff --check‘.
- Run ‘git status --short --untracked-files=all‘ and inspect untracked files.
- Remove generated caches, local smoke files, downloaded fixtures, virtualenvs,
node caches, coverage output, and temporary logs unless the prompt explicitly
asks to add them.
- If any normal test cannot run, state the exact command and the observed
,→ reason,
then compensate with the closest direct smoke you can execute.
Listing 8 SWE-Bench Pro harness: bin/repair-verify (tool)
#!/usr/bin/env bash
set -euo pipefail
usage() {
cat <<’EOF’
Usage: repair-verify [repo] [--clean-pycache] [-- extra command...]
Runs cheap, task-agnostic verification helpers from inside a SWE-bench repo:
- discovers common non-PATH Go/Python/Node tools
- runs git diff --check when the repo is a git worktree

- runs cheap syntax/package checks when obvious source files exist
- reports generated artifacts that should usually be removed
- optionally runs one extra task-specific command
Examples:
harness/bin/repair-verify repo
harness/bin/repair-verify repo -- go test ./lib/events ./lib/service
harness/bin/repair-verify repo --clean-pycache -- python -m compileall -q lib
EOF
}
repo="repo"
clean_pycache=0
while [[ $# -gt 0 ]]; do
case "$1" in
--help|-h)
usage
exit 0
;;
--clean-pycache)
clean_pycache=1
shift
;;
--)
shift
break
;;
-*)
echo "unknown option: $1" >&2
usage >&2
exit 2
;;
*)
repo="$1"
shift
;;
esac
done
if [[ ! -d "$repo" ]]; then
echo "repo directory not found: $repo" >&2
exit 2
fi
cd "$repo"
find_tool() {
local name="$1"
shift
if command -v "$name" >/dev/null 2>&1; then
command -v "$name"
return 0
fi
for candidate in "$@"; do
if [[ -x "$candidate" ]]; then
printf ’%s\n’ "$candidate"
return 0
fi
done
return 1
}
go_bin="$(find_tool go /tmp/go/bin/go || true)"
gofmt_bin="$(find_tool gofmt /tmp/go/bin/gofmt || true)"
python_bin="$(find_tool python3 /usr/bin/python3 /usr/local/bin/python3 ||
,→ find_tool python /usr/bin/python || true)"
node_bin="$(find_tool node /usr/bin/node /usr/local/bin/node || true)"

echo "== discovered tools =="
echo "go: ${go_bin:-not found}"
echo "gofmt: ${gofmt_bin:-not found}"
echo "python: ${python_bin:-not found}"
echo "node: ${node_bin:-not found}"
if git rev-parse --is-inside-work-tree >/dev/null 2>&1; then
echo
echo "== git diff check =="
git diff --check
fi
if [[ -n "$gofmt_bin" ]] && find . -path ./.git -prune -o -name ’*.go’ -print
,→ -quit | grep -q .; then
echo
echo "== gofmt check =="
unformatted="$("$gofmt_bin" -l $(find . -path ./.git -prune -o -name ’*.go’
,→ -print))"
if [[ -n "$unformatted" ]]; then
echo "$unformatted"
echo "gofmt check failed: run gofmt on the files above" >&2
exit 1
fi
fi
if [[ -n "$go_bin" && -f go.mod ]]; then
echo
echo "== go package list =="
"$go_bin" list ./... >/dev/null
fi
if [[ -n "$python_bin" ]] && find . -path ./.git -prune -o -name ’*.py’ -print
,→ -quit | grep -q .; then
echo
echo "== python compile touched files =="
if git rev-parse --is-inside-work-tree >/dev/null 2>&1; then
mapfile -t py_files < <(git diff --name-only --diff-filter=ACMR -- ’*.py’)
if [[ ${#py_files[@]} -gt 0 ]]; then
"$python_bin" -m py_compile "${py_files[@]}"
else
echo "no changed Python files"
fi
else
echo "not a git worktree; skipping touched-file compile"
fi
fi
if [[ -n "$node_bin" ]] && git rev-parse --is-inside-work-tree >/dev/null 2>&1;
,→ then
mapfile -t js_files < <(git diff --name-only --diff-filter=ACMR -- ’*.js’
,→ ’*.cjs’ ’*.mjs’)
if [[ ${#js_files[@]} -gt 0 ]]; then
echo
echo "== node syntax touched js files =="
for file in "${js_files[@]}"; do
"$node_bin" --check "$file"
done
fi
fi
if [[ $# -gt 0 ]]; then
echo
echo "== extra command =="
"$@"
fi
if [[ "$clean_pycache" -eq 1 ]]; then
echo
echo "== cleaning python caches =="

find . \( -type d -name __pycache__ -o -type d -name .pytest_cache \) -prune
,→ -exec rm -rf {} +
find . -type f \( -name ’*.pyc’ -o -name ’*.pyo’ \) -delete
fi
echo
echo "== generated artifact scan =="
find . \
-path ./.git -prune -o \
\( -type d \( -name __pycache__ -o -name .pytest_cache -o -name .mypy_cache
,→ -o -name .tox -o -name node_modules -o -name .nyc_output -o -name coverage
,→ \) \
-o -type f \( -name ’*.pyc’ -o -name ’*.pyo’ -o -name ’*.profraw’ -o -name
,→ ’*.test’ \) \) \
-print | sed -n ’s#^\./##;1,200p’
if git rev-parse --is-inside-work-tree >/dev/null 2>&1; then
echo
echo "== worktree status =="
git status --short --untracked-files=all
fi
echo
echo "Reminder: run a direct smoke for the prompt contract: public API shape,
,→ negative paths, named backends/platforms, and boundary cases."
H.2 Terminal-Bench 2
Listing 9 Terminal-Bench 2 harness: README.md (instructions)
# Terminal-Bench Harness Playbook
Use this harness before solving a task and again before the final answer. The
,→ goal is to solve the task on its stated merits, leave the requested
,→ artifacts in the container, and avoid wasting time on paths that only
,→ satisfy a visible symptom.
## First Pass
1. Extract the contract from the prompt:
- final artifacts and exact paths, usually under ‘/app‘
- exact command(s) or invocation style the grader may use
- allowed and forbidden files; treat ‘test/‘ and ‘tests/‘ as different names
- whether the task is black-box/API-only, reverse engineering, package
,→ repair, system setup, or stochastic implementation
2. Use the host-to-container script pattern from the prompt for nontrivial
,→ commands. It avoids quoting failures and leaves a useful command trail in
,→ ‘/host-ws‘.
3. Inspect only sources that are consistent with the task. "Readable" is not
,→ the same as "methodologically allowed."
4. Start with a tiny reproducible probe, then scale to the full input. Save
,→ intermediate scripts, logs, and validation commands in the host workspace
,→ when useful.
## Integrity Boundaries
For tasks framed as black-box recovery, model extraction, API querying, or "by
,→ making queries":
- Do not read implementation internals to recover hidden parameters, constants,
,→ labels, or answers.
- Import or execute only the public API needed for queries unless the prompt
,→ explicitly asks for source inspection.
- Validate recovery with query-derived evidence: held-out probes,
,→ recurrence/support diagnostics, round-trip checks, or output agreement. Do
,→ not compare against hidden ground-truth variables even if they are exposed.
For tasks asking for an emulator, interpreter, compiler, sampler, server, or
,→ independent reimplementation:

- Prefer a general implementation path over task-specific state injection or
,→ host-side artifact synthesis.
- If host hooks are necessary, keep them minimal and document why they preserve
,→ the requested abstraction.
- Verify the final artifact is produced through the intended path. Example: an
,→ emulated program should create its own output through emulated syscalls,
,→ not through a host reconstruction of internal memory.
## Final Validation Gate
Before finishing, run a grader-shaped validation:
- Run the exact command from the prompt, with the same flags and paths.
- Compare all observable outputs that matter: files, stdout, stderr, exit
,→ status, sizes, and checksums when applicable.
- Verify artifacts are in the container filesystem path that will be graded,
,→ not only in ‘/host-ws‘.
- Confirm forbidden paths and grading assets were not used.
- Add at least one hidden-surface smoke check when the visible example is
,→ narrow: import more modules, exercise a second API form, test
,→ join/post/leave instead of only setup, or check geometry constraints after
,→ serialization.
## Package And Container Repair
Use this for Python/R/Cython/library compatibility tasks.
- Keep dependency versions required by the prompt stable. Watch for ‘pip
,→ install‘ or build tools silently upgrading NumPy or other pinned packages.
- Run the requested snippet from outside the source tree so imports come from
,→ the installed package.
- Assert compiled extensions load from compiled artifacts, not fallback ‘.py‘
,→ files:
‘‘‘sh
python - <<’PY’
import inspect
from package import module
print(inspect.getfile(module))
PY
‘‘‘
- Add broad, non-grader checks after the exact snippet:
- import representative public modules excluding forbidden test/grader paths
- ‘compileall‘ package code excluding test directories when syntax
,→ compatibility is a risk
- direct smoke calls for compiled helpers
- Reuse ‘tools/python_package_smoke.py‘ for broad import, compiled-extension,
,→ and compile checks when it fits the package shape.
- Prefer explicit, file-targeted compatibility patches over broad regex
,→ rewrites unless the rewrite is followed by a scan for unintended changes.
## Reverse Engineering And Binary Matching
- Collect behavior first: exit status, stdout, stderr, generated files, hashes,
,→ file sizes, and compression limits.
- Rebuild with the exact prompt command. Optimized flags can change
,→ floating-point or layout-sensitive output.
- Byte-compare every observable artifact. For generated images or binary files,
,→ compare both hashes and targeted structure fields.
- If a source size limit exists, check the exact measurement command from the
,→ prompt.
## Large File Editing And Vim Macros
- Infer the transformation from head/tail/random samples and row counts before
,→ editing the real file.
- Validate the script shape against the allowed command list and count macro
,→ keystrokes.

- Prefer file-wide substitutions for simple regular transformations; per-line
,→ macros can be much slower at million-row scale.
- When using Vim replacement strings, test escaping and backreferences on a
,→ tiny copy first.
- Use portable timing fallbacks such as ‘date +%s‘ if ‘/usr/bin/time‘ is
,→ unavailable.
- Final check: run headless Vim on a saved copy or the real input, then ‘cmp‘
,→ against the expected file.
## Geometry And Segmentation Outputs
For mask conversion or image-geometry tasks:
- Use the required model family and real weights when the prompt requires real
,→ segmentation. A randomly initialized checkpoint only validates plumbing.
- Keep the CLI general: no hardcoded demo paths; support the prompt’s
,→ positional/flag style when ambiguous.
- After writing CSV/JSON outputs, validate the serialized artifact, not just
,→ the in-memory masks:
- row count and non-geometry columns preserved
- all masks are polylines, closed when the format expects closure
- no rectangle-like fallback polygons
- exactly one connected component per object
- no rasterized overlaps after contour export
- Reuse ‘tools/validate_mask_csv.py‘ for CSV polygon masks when the column
,→ names match the prompt.
- If CPU inference is slow, batch independent model calls where the library
,→ supports it.
## Metacircular Or Language Tasks
- Treat visible ‘test/‘ programs as sanctioned examples unless the prompt
,→ forbids that exact path. Do not touch ‘tests/‘, ‘test_outputs‘, grader
,→ logs, or solution files.
- Compare native interpreter output against the new evaluator/interpreter on
,→ every visible program.
- Include the prompt’s nested/self-hosting example as a final smoke check.
- Avoid special-casing the evaluator’s own filename unless the prompt
,→ explicitly allows it; it weakens evidence that self-interpretation really
,→ works.
## System Service Tasks
- Prefer normal service CLIs over low-level database/API object creation,
,→ because defaults often populate domains, styles, policies, queues, and
,→ pipelines.
- Verify ownership and runtime directories before starting daemons.
- Do not trust a single status command; also check processes, queues, logs, and
,→ direct behavior.
- Build a full behavioral smoke test from the prompt. For a mailing list, that
,→ means join confirmation, posting delivery to subscribers, leave
,→ confirmation, queue drain, and final policy values.
## Scientific Or Stochastic Implementations
- Confirm the runtime exists and install the minimal required runtime if it
,→ does not.
- The public ‘test()‘ function should print clear ‘NAME: PASS‘ or ‘NAME: FAIL‘
,→ lines plus relevant statistics.
- Test both the public sampler and any complex helper modules.
- Include deterministic invalid-input checks and at least one rejection case
,→ for violated assumptions, such as non-log-concavity.
- For stochastic outputs, compare distribution statistics with tolerances and
,→ persist the required sample file.
## Constraint/Solver Recovery Tasks
- For small ciphers or exact finite-state systems, encode the exact operations
,→ as constraints when that is simpler than deriving a full attack by hand.

- Constrain all available known examples when feasible, not just the minimum
,→ needed to get one candidate.
- Validate recovered parameters against every known pair, then validate the
,→ final deliverable with the provided encrypt/decrypt or round-trip path.
Listing 10 Terminal-Bench 2 harness: tools/python_package_smoke.py (tool)
#!/usr/bin/env python3
"""Run installed-package smoke checks without touching test/grader paths."""
from __future__ import annotations
import argparse
import compileall
import importlib
import inspect
import pkgutil
from pathlib import Path
FORBIDDEN_PARTS = {
"test",
"tests",
"test_outputs",
"solution",
"logs",
"verifier",
"__pycache__",
}
def forbidden(path: Path) -> bool:
return any(part in FORBIDDEN_PARTS for part in path.parts)
def iter_modules(package_name: str, limit: int | None) -> list[str]:
package = importlib.import_module(package_name)
names = [package_name]
package_path = getattr(package, "__path__", None)
if package_path is not None:
for module in pkgutil.walk_packages(package_path,
,→ prefix=f"{package_name}."):
lower_parts = set(module.name.lower().split("."))
if lower_parts & FORBIDDEN_PARTS:
continue
names.append(module.name)
if limit is not None and len(names) >= limit:
break
return names
def main() -> int:
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
parser.add_argument("package")
parser.add_argument("--compiled-module", action="append", default=[])
parser.add_argument("--import-limit", type=int, default=200)
parser.add_argument("--compileall", action="store_true")
args = parser.parse_args()
failures: list[str] = []
imported = 0
for name in iter_modules(args.package, args.import_limit):
try:
importlib.import_module(name)
imported += 1
except Exception as exc: # noqa: BLE001 - smoke tool should report all
,→ failures

failures.append(f"import failed {name}: {type(exc).__name__}:
,→ {exc}")
for name in args.compiled_module:
try:
module = importlib.import_module(name)
path = inspect.getfile(module)
except Exception as exc: # noqa: BLE001
failures.append(f"compiled module import failed {name}:
,→ {type(exc).__name__}: {exc}")
continue
if not any(path.endswith(suffix) for suffix in (".so", ".pyd", ".dll",
,→ ".dylib")):
failures.append(f"{name} did not load from a compiled extension:
,→ {path}")
if args.compileall:
package = importlib.import_module(args.package)
roots = [Path(path) for path in getattr(package, "__path__", [])]
for root in roots:
for py_file in root.rglob("*.py"):
if forbidden(py_file):
continue
ok = compileall.compile_file(str(py_file), quiet=1)
if not ok:
failures.append(f"compile failed {py_file}")
if failures:
print(f"PYTHON_PACKAGE_SMOKE: FAIL imported={imported}")
for failure in failures[:80]:
print(failure)
if len(failures) > 80:
print(f"... {len(failures) - 80} more failures")
return 1
print(f"PYTHON_PACKAGE_SMOKE: PASS imported={imported}")
return 0
if __name__ == "__main__":
raise SystemExit(main())
Listing 11 Terminal-Bench 2 harness: tools/validate_mask_csv.py (tool)
#!/usr/bin/env python3
"""Validate polygon mask CSV outputs for segmentation/refinement tasks.
The checker is intentionally structural: it does not judge segmentation quality,
but it catches common grading-surface failures after serialization.
"""
from __future__ import annotations
import argparse
import ast
from pathlib import Path
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
def parse_coords(value: object) -> list[float]:
if isinstance(value, (list, tuple, np.ndarray)):
return [float(x) for x in value]
text = str(value).strip()
if not text:
return []

try:
parsed = ast.literal_eval(text)
except (ValueError, SyntaxError):
text = text.strip("[]")
if not text:
return []
return [float(part) for part in text.replace(";", ",").split(",") if
,→ part.strip()]
if not isinstance(parsed, (list, tuple)):
return []
return [float(x) for x in parsed]
def is_rectangle_like(xs: list[float], ys: list[float]) -> bool:
points = list(zip(xs, ys))
if len(points) < 4:
return False
unique = list(dict.fromkeys(points))
if len(unique) == 5 and unique[0] == unique[-1]:
unique = unique[:-1]
if len(unique) != 4:
return False
return len({x for x, _ in unique}) == 2 and len({y for _, y in unique}) == 2
def rasterize_with_numpy(points: np.ndarray, height: int, width: int) ->
,→ np.ndarray:
mask = np.zeros((height, width), dtype=np.uint8)
min_x = max(0, int(np.floor(points[:, 0].min())))
max_x = min(width - 1, int(np.ceil(points[:, 0].max())))
min_y = max(0, int(np.floor(points[:, 1].min())))
max_y = min(height - 1, int(np.ceil(points[:, 1].max())))
if min_x > max_x or min_y > max_y:
return mask
x_centers = np.arange(min_x, max_x + 1, dtype=float) + 0.5
for y in range(min_y, max_y + 1):
y_center = y + 0.5
inside = np.zeros_like(x_centers, dtype=bool)
j = len(points) - 1
for i in range(len(points)):
xi, yi = points[i]
xj, yj = points[j]
crosses = (yi > y_center) != (yj > y_center)
if crosses:
x_intersect = (xj - xi) *
 
(y_center - yi) / (yj - yi) + xi
inside ^= x_centers < x_intersect
j = i
mask[y, min_x : max_x + 1] = inside.astype(np.uint8)
return mask
def rasterize(xs: list[float], ys: list[float], height: int, width: int) ->
,→ np.ndarray:
pts = np.array([[round(x), round(y)] for x, y in zip(xs, ys)],
,→ dtype=np.int32)
pts[:, 0] = np.clip(pts[:, 0], 0, width - 1)
pts[:, 1] = np.clip(pts[:, 1], 0, height - 1)
if len(pts) < 3:
return np.zeros((height, width), dtype=np.uint8)
try:
import cv2
mask = np.zeros((height, width), dtype=np.uint8)
cv2.fillPoly(mask, [pts], 1)
return mask
except ImportError:
return rasterize_with_numpy(pts.astype(float), height, width)

def connected_components(mask: np.ndarray) -> int:
try:
import cv2
count, _ = cv2.connectedComponents(mask.astype(np.uint8),
,→ connectivity=8)
return int(count - 1)
except ImportError:
seen = np.zeros(mask.shape, dtype=bool)
active = mask.astype(bool)
components = 0
height, width = mask.shape
for y, x in np.argwhere(active):
if seen[y, x]:
continue
components += 1
stack = [(int(y), int(x))]
seen[y, x] = True
while stack:
cy, cx = stack.pop()
for ny in range(max(0, cy - 1), min(height, cy + 2)):
for nx in range(max(0, cx - 1), min(width, cx + 2)):
if active[ny, nx] and not seen[ny, nx]:
seen[ny, nx] = True
stack.append((ny, nx))
return components
def infer_canvas(df: pd.DataFrame, margin: int) -> tuple[int, int]:
xmax = int(np.ceil(pd.to_numeric(df["xmax"]).max())) + margin
ymax = int(np.ceil(pd.to_numeric(df["ymax"]).max())) + margin
return max(1, ymax), max(1, xmax)
def main() -> int:
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
parser.add_argument("--input-csv", help="Optional original CSV for
,→ row/column preservation checks")
parser.add_argument("--output-csv", required=True)
parser.add_argument("--width", type=int)
parser.add_argument("--height", type=int)
parser.add_argument("--margin", type=int, default=3)
args = parser.parse_args()
output_path = Path(args.output_csv)
df = pd.read_csv(output_path)
required = {"xmin", "xmax", "ymin", "ymax", "coords_x", "coords_y"}
missing = required - set(df.columns)
failures: list[str] = []
if missing:
failures.append(f"missing columns: {sorted(missing)}")
print("\n".join(failures))
return 1
if args.input_csv:
original = pd.read_csv(args.input_csv)
if len(original) != len(df):
failures.append(f"row count changed: input={len(original)}
,→ output={len(df)}")
lost = [col for col in original.columns if col not in df.columns]
if lost:
failures.append(f"output lost input columns: {lost}")
height, width = (
(args.height, args.width)
if args.height and args.width
else infer_canvas(df, args.margin)
)

occupied = np.zeros((height, width), dtype=np.uint16)
for idx, row in df.iterrows():
xs = parse_coords(row["coords_x"])
ys = parse_coords(row["coords_y"])
if len(xs) != len(ys):
failures.append(f"row {idx}: coords_x/coords_y length mismatch")
continue
if len(xs) < 4:
failures.append(f"row {idx}: fewer than 4 polygon points")
continue
if (xs[0], ys[0]) != (xs[-1], ys[-1]):
failures.append(f"row {idx}: polygon is not closed")
if is_rectangle_like(x