Toastmasters International -10 Tips from Toastmasters International
Skip to main content
September 2026
View PDF
Previous
Next
Presentation Skills
June 2021
10 Tips from Toastmasters International
1
Avoid speaking in monotone.
Use inflection to signal significant points in your speech and keep the audience engaged.
2
Step up.
If you haven’t filled a certain meeting role in your club yet, make it a point to do so at an upcoming meeting. It will not only get you out of your comfort zone, you’ll also gain a better understanding of the overall club experience.
3
Manage your time.
Serving as the
timer
at your club meetings and giving speeches with time limits will help you master time management skills that will help you in all areas of your life.
4
Speak your case.
Sometimes public speaking has an ­audience of one, such as a traffic court judge or customer service representative. Presenting a well-organized argument can help you win your case.
5
PREP (Point, Reason, Example, Point).
Start your speech with a clear point. Explain your reason for choosing the subject. Illustrate your point with examples. End with a clear point that wraps up the speech.
6
Use common language.
Impress your audience through your presentation and mastery of your topic, not by using complicated words. For example: Say “help” instead of “assist” or “use” instead of “utilize.”
7
Don’t get lost in translation.
If you deliver a speech in your second (or even third) language, use humor, metaphor, and analogy sparingly, as these don’t always translate well into other languages.
8
Take jokes for a test drive.
If you want to include a joke in your speech, write several options and test them out with your family, coworkers, or club members to see how they are received.
9
Use people’s names.
People love to be addressed by their name in conversation. To help you remember someone’s name, be sure to say it back to them to verify you have it right, and try to use it several times to make it stick.
10
Keep a journal.
When you get ideas for speech topics, jot them down in a journal so you have them to refer to when you’re tapped for ideas and need inspiration.
Share this article
Previous Article
Next Article
Related Articles
Communication
5 Easy Tips for Crafting a Speech
Start with the two basic concepts of construction and content.
Judith T. Krauthamer
Speechwriting
Speechwriting 101
Expert speechwriters weigh in on the basics of crafting a speech.
Mitch Mirkin
Humor
The Formula for Funny
Try different humor tactics to win grins, giggles, and guffaws from your audience.
Beth Black
×
Close
Share This Article
LEARN MORE
Learn more about the award-winning publication.
About Magazine
Discover more about the award-winning publication.
Magazine FAQ
Answers to your common magazine questions.
Article Submissions
How to submit an article query or story idea.
Photo/Video Submissions
How to submit pictures and videos.
Staff
Meet the editorial team.
Loading...
Toastmasters International
Find a Club
Start a Club
Login
Search
Search
