# Released evidence excerpt 2403.14403: complexity-conditioned retrieval routing


Warning: orx 0.1.117 is outdated (latest 0.1.118). A newer release is available; upgrade to stay compatible with the API. Run `orx update` to upgrade.

alphaXiv: https://www.alphaxiv.org/abs/2403.14403
GitHub: https://github.com/AsH1605/Adaptive-RAG

Adaptive-RAG: Learning to Adapt Retrieval-Augmented
Large Language Models through Question Complexity
Soyeong Jeong
1 
Jinheon Baek
2 
Sukmin Cho
1 
Sung Ju Hwang
1,2 
Jong C. Park
1
*
School of Computing
1 
Graduate School of AI
2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
1,2
{starsuzi,jinheon.baek,nelllpic,sjhwang82,jongpark}@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract
Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models
(LLMs), which incorporate the non-parametric
knowledge from external knowledge bases into
LLMs, have emerged as a promising approach
to enhancing response accuracy in several tasks,
such as Question-Answering (QA). However,
even though there are various approaches deal-
ing with queries of different complexities, they
either handle simple queries with unnecessary
computational overhead or fail to adequately
address complex multi-step queries; yet, not
all user requests fall into only one of the sim-
ple or complex categories. In this work, we
propose a novel adaptive QA framework that
can dynamically select the most suitable strat-
egy for (retrieval-augmented) LLMs from the
simplest to the most sophisticated ones based
on the query complexity. Also, this selec-
tion process is operationalized with a classi-
fier, which is a smaller LM trained to predict
the complexity level of incoming queries with
automatically collected labels, obtained from
actual predicted outcomes of models and in-
herent inductive biases in datasets. This ap-
proach offers a balanced strategy, seamlessly
adapting between the iterative and single-step
retrieval-augmented LLMs, as well as the no-
retrieval methods, in response to a range of
query complexities. We validate our model
on a set of open-domain QA datasets, cov-
ering multiple query complexities, and show
that ours enhances the overall efficiency and
accuracy of QA systems, compared to rele-
vant baselines including the adaptive retrieval
approaches. Code is available at: https://
github.com/starsuzi/Adaptive-RAG.
1 Introduction
Recent Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown
et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023;
Anil et al., 2023) have shown overwhelming per-
formances across diverse tasks, including question-
* 
Corresponding author
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
Time per Query
47
48
49
50
51
Performance (F1)
No Retrieval
Single-step Approach
Adaptive Retrieval
Multi-step Approach
Adaptive-RAG (Ours)
Performance vs Time with GPT-3.5
Figure 1: QA performance (F1) and efficiency (Time/Query)
for different retrieval-augmented generation approaches. We
use the GPT-3.5-Turbo-Instruct as the base LLM.
answering (QA) (Yang et al., 2018; Kwiatkowski
et al., 2019). However, they still generate factu-
ally incorrect answers since their knowledge solely
relies on their parametric memory (Kasai et al.,
2022; Mallen et al., 2023). Meanwhile, memoriz-
ing all the (ever-changing) world knowledge may
not be possible. To address this problem, retrieval-
augmented LLMs (Borgeaud et al., 2022; Izacard
et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023), which incorporate
non-parametric knowledge into LLMs with addi-
tional retrieval modules, have gained much increas-
ing attention. Specifically, these models access
a knowledge base, which serves as an extensive
repository of information across various subjects
and disciplines, to retrieve information relevant to
the given input, and then incorporate the retrieved
information into LLMs, which enables them to stay
accurate and current with the world knowledge.
A particularly salient application of retrieval-
augmented LLMs is to handling QA tasks, whose
goal is to provide correct answers in response to
user queries, especially those of high complexity.
Early work on retrieval-augmented LLMs focuses
primarily on single-hop queries (Lazaridou et al.,
2022; Ram et al., 2023), whose answers are typ-
ically found within a single document; therefore,
this approach involves retrieving a relevant doc-
ument based on the query and subsequently inte-
grating this information into QA models to formu-
late a response. However, unlike this single-hop
QA, some queries require connecting and aggregat-
ing multiple documents, which are, furthermore,
arXiv:2403.14403v2 [cs.CL] 28 Mar 2024

Retrieval
Complex Query:
What currency is in
Billy Giles’ birthplace?
Simple Query:
When is the birthday
of Michael F. Phelps?
Documents
Answer
Documents
Answer
(A) Single-Step Approach
Inaccurate
Retrieval
Retrieval
Simple Query:
When is the birthday
of Michael F. Phelps?
Documents
(Intermediate)
Answers
(B) Multi-Step Approach
Inefficient
k times
Complex Query:
What currency is in
Billy Giles’ birthplace?
Documents
(Intermediate)
Answers
k times
Straightforward Query:
Paris is the capital of what?
(C) Our Adaptive Approach
Answer
Simple Query:
When is the birthday
of Michael F. Phelps?
Documents
Answer
Complex Query:
What currency is in
Billy Giles’ birthplace?
Documents
(Intermediate)
Answers
k times
Classifier
Figure 2: A conceptual comparison of different retrieval-augmented LLM approaches to question answering. (A) In response to
a query, this single-step approach retrieves relevant documents and then generates an answer. However, it may not be sufficient
for complex queries that require multi-step reasoning. (B) This multi-step approach iteratively retrieves documents and generates
intermediate answers, which is powerful yet largely inefficient for the simple query since it requires multiple accesses to both
LLMs and retrievers. (C) Our adaptive approach can select the most suitable strategy for retrieval-augmented LLMs, ranging
from iterative, to single, to even no retrieval approaches, based on the complexity of given queries determined by our classifier.
often not answerable through a single-step pro-
cess of retrieval-and-response. An example query
is ‘When did the people who captured Malakoff
come to the region where Philipsburg is located?’,
which requires four reasoning steps to solve. There-
fore, to effectively handle such complex queries,
recent studies have concentrated largely on multi-
step and multi-reasoning QA, which requires itera-
tive accesses to both LLMs and retrievers multiple
times (Press et al., 2023; Trivedi et al., 2023), at
the cost of heavy computational overheads.
Yet, we should rethink: In a real-world scenario,
are all the requests from users complex? Instead,
users might often ask simple and straightforward
questions, while only occasionally asking complex
ones. Specifically, a query such as ‘Paris is the
capital of what?’ is likely to be asked more fre-
quently, compared to the aforementioned multi-
step query, and this simpler query might also be
easily answered by the LLMs themselves, without
accessing external knowledge. In other words, a
multi-step QA approach could give rise to unnec-
essary computational overhead for simple queries,
even though it would be vital for complex queries
(see Figure 2 (A)). On the other hand, handling
complex queries with single-step-retrieval or even
non-retrieval strategies would be largely insuffi-
cient (Figure 2 (B)). This suggests the need for an
adaptive QA system, which can dynamically adjust
the operational strategies of retrieval-augmented
LLMs based on the query complexity. While some
recent approaches are capable of doing this based
on the frequency of entities in queries (Mallen et al.,
2023) or on the generated outputs from models
for multi-step QA (Trivedi et al., 2023), they are
still suboptimal: the former methods are overly
simplistic, failing to consider multi-hop queries;
meanwhile, the latter are excessively complex, ter-
minating answer solving steps after several rounds
of module access.
In this work, considering diverse complexity lev-
els of real-world queries, we argue that previous
one-size-fits-all approaches might be inadequate to
cover all of them. Instead, we propose to select the
most suitable strategy from a range of (retrieval-
augmented) LLMs, each of which is tailored to the
specific complexity of the input query. Notably,
a critical step in this process is pre-defining the
query complexity, which is instrumental in deter-
mining the most fitting model to it. In this work,
we operationalize this process with a novel classi-
fier, which is a smaller model trained to predict the
complexity level of incoming queries (see Figure 2
(c)). Moreover, we automatically collect its training
datasets without human labeling, by leveraging the
predicted outcomes (i.e., which models accurately
respond to which queries) as well as by capitalizing
on the inherent biases in existing datasets (i.e., sam-
ples in the datasets are designed either for single-
step or for multi-step QA scenarios). This proposed
method can offer a robust middle ground among the
iterative LLM augmentation methods for complex
queries, single-step methods for simpler queries,
and even no-retrieval-augmented methods for the
most straightforward queries (answerable by LLMs
themselves), thus significantly enhancing the over-
all efficiency and accuracy, as shown in Figure 1.
We refer to our framework as Adaptive Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (Adaptive-RAG).
We validate Adaptive-RAG using benchmark
open-domain QA datasets, covering a wide range
of query complexity from single-hop (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016; Joshi et al., 2017; Kwiatkowski et al.,
2019) to multi-hop (Yang et al., 2018; Ho et al.,
2020; Trivedi et al., 2022b) queries. The exper-
imental results show that ours significantly im-
proves the overall accuracy and efficiency, com-
pared to the prior adaptive strategies, on multiple
LLMs, such as GPT-3.5 (Brown et al., 2020) and
FLAN-T5 series (Chung et al., 2022).

Our contributions and findings are threefold:
• We point out the realistic scenario of queries of
varying complexities, and find out that existing
retrieval-augmented generation approaches tend
to be overly simple or complex.
• We adapt retrieval-augmented LLMs to the query
complexity assessed by the classifier, which en-
ables the utilization of the most suitable approach
tailored to each query.
• We show that our Adaptive-RAG is highly effec-
tive and efficient, balancing between the com-
plexity and the simplicity for diverse queries.
2 Related Work
Open-domain QA Open-domain QA is the task
of accurately answering a query by sourcing for
query-relevant documents, and then interpreting
them to provide answers (Chen et al., 2017; Zhu
et al., 2021), which, thus, generally involves two
modules: a retriever (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Xiong
et al., 2021) and a reader (Yang et al., 2019; Izac-
ard and Grave, 2021; Jeong et al., 2023). Along
with the emergence of LLMs with superior rea-
soning capabilities thanks to their billion-sized pa-
rameters (Wei et al., 2022a), a synergy between
LLMs and retrievers has led to significant advance-
ments (Lazaridou et al., 2022; Ram et al., 2023).
Specifically, this integration has been shown to
enhance Open-domain QA by mitigating the hallu-
cination problem from LLMs through strengthened
reasoning abilities of the reader, as well as utiliz-
ing the retrieved, external documents (Cho et al.,
2023). Despite these advancements for single-hop
retrieval-augmented LLMs, however, the complex-
ity of some queries needs a more complex strategy.
Multi-hop QA Multi-hop QA is an extension of
conventional Open-domain QA, which addition-
ally requires the system to comprehensively gather
and contextualize information from multiple docu-
ments (often iteratively), to answer more complex
queries (Trivedi et al., 2022a; Yang et al., 2018). In
the realm of multi-hop QA, the approach to itera-
tively access both LLMs and the retrieval module
is generally employed. Specifically, Khattab et al.
(2022), Press et al. (2023), Pereira et al. (2023)
and Khot et al. (2023) p